---
title: "Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"
arxiv_id: "2307.03697"
license: "CC-BY-NC-ND"
license_tier: "restricted"
redistributable: false
license_url: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/"
date: "2023-07-07"
full_text: true
pdf_url: "https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.03697v1"
html_url: "https://arxiv.org/html/2307.03697"
authors:
  - "Sinem Getir Yaman"
  - "Ana Cavalcanti"
  - "Radu Calinescu"
  - "Colin Paterson"
  - "Pedro Ribeiro"
  - "Beverley Townsend"
categories:
  - "cs.SE"
---

# Specification, Validation and Verification of  
Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements  
for Autonomous Agents

Sinem Getir Yaman1, Ana Cavalcanti1, Radu Calinescu1, Colin Paterson1, Pedro Ribeiro1, and Beverley Townsend2 1\. Department of Computer Science, University of York, UK  
2\. York Law School, University of York, UK

###### Abstract

Autonomous agents are increasingly being proposed for use in healthcare, assistive care, education, and other applications governed by complex human-centric norms. To ensure compliance with these norms, the rules they induce need to be unambiguously defined, checked for consistency, and used to verify the agent. In this paper, we introduce a framework for formal specification, validation and verification of social, legal, ethical, empathetic and cultural (SLEEC) rules for autonomous agents. Our framework comprises:В (i)В a language for specifying SLEEC rules and rule _defeaters_ (that is, circumstances in which a rule does not apply or an alternative form of the rule is required); (ii)В a formal semantics (defined in the process algebra tock-CSP) for the language; and (iii)В methods for detecting conflicts and redundancy within a set of rules, and for verifying the compliance of an autonomous agent with such rules. We show the applicability of our framework for two autonomous agents from different domains:В a firefighter UAV, and an assistive-dressing robot.

###### keywords:

software specification; timed systems; verification and validation; sociotechnical systems

\\csdef

WGMwgm \\csdefQEqe \\csdefEPep \\csdefPMSpms \\csdefBECbec \\csdefDEde

## 1 Introduction

There is huge push to develop and use autonomous agents (software and cyber-physical systems) in high-stakes applications from health and social care, transportation, education, and other domains. Along functional and non-functional requirements such as dependability, performance and utility, a new class of non-functional requirements related to social, legal, ethical, empathetic, and cultural (SLEEC) concernsВ TownsendPANCCHT22 has become increasingly important and challenging for these applications В wing2021trustworthy; moor2006nature; Inverardi22. Despite that recognised importance, there is currently very little support for the elicitation, specification, validation, and verification of SLEEC requirements. Existing research in the area is promising, but only covers specific aspects of the problem. For example, there are results on the studyВ Bremner2019DFW; Dennis2016FSW and verificationВ dennis2015towards of ethical concerns of autonomous agents, modelling of legal requirements for software systemsВ boltz2022model, and development of personalised ethical assistant tools based on the moral choices of the userВ AlfieriIMP22.

In this paper, we build on this early research to provide support for the development of autonomous agents that need to perform tasks that raise SLEEC concernsВ TownsendPANCCHT22; Floridi2018. To that end, we introduce a tool-supported SLEEC requirement specification and verification framework that includes a language for defining these concerns as _SLEEC rules_ that complement the functional and other non-functional requirements of an autonomous agent. Our language supports the use of defeasible logicВ horty2012reasons; zalta2005stanford to allow both the definition of SLEEC constraints and the specification of conditions under which these constraints do not apply or may need to be replaced with alternative constraints. Such conditions are expressed in terms of additional information coming from the environment or the agent components, and are specified within SLEEC rules as _defeaters_. Given a set of SLEEC rules for an autonomous agent, our framework automates: (i)В their formalisation in tock-CSPВ BaxterRC22, a version of the communicating sequential processes (CSP) algebraВ Hoare78CSP that can describe discrete-time properties; (ii)В the validation of their consistency, to ensure that the rules are not conflicting, and to identify redundant rules; and (ii)В the verification of an agentвҖҷs compliance with the validated rules.

We have evaluated our framework with two case studies:В a firefighter uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) and an assistive robot application from the healthcare domain. Their rules have been identified with the help of lawyers and ethicists. Our models representing the agent behaviour are developed using a domain-specific language for robotics, RoboChartВ Robochart. This is a diagrammatic notation that can be used to model control software using state machines, time primitives to capture budgets and deadlines, and a simple component model. Since there is support to generate tock-CSP models of RoboChart diagrams automatically, we can use these models to formally verify designs of the autonomous agentsвҖҷ software against SLEEC rules.

The main contributions of our paper include:

1.  1.
    
    A domain-specific language supporting the specification of SLEEC rules for autonomous agents.
    
2.  2.
    
    The definition of a formal semantics for this language in tock-CSP, catering for the definition of time budgets, deadlines, and timeouts in the rules.
    
3.  3.
    
    A method for the formal validation of SLEEC specifications, to detect conflicting and redundant rules.
    
4.  4.
    
    A method for formally verifying the compliance of a tock-CSP-encoded agent specification or design with respect to a set of valid SLEEC rules.
    
5.  5.
    
    End-to-end tool support for SLEEC requirements specification, consistency validation and verification, using a combination of software components developed by our project and the FDR model checkerВ FDR.
    

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section [2](#S2 "2 Running example вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") introduces the firefighter UAV, which we use as a running example in later sections. SectionВ [3](#S3 "3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") presents the SLEEC language, and SectionВ [4](#S4 "4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") defines its formal semantics. SectionВ [5](#S5 "5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") describes our approach to conflict and redundancy checking, and our verification process for SLEEC specifications. SectionВ [6](#S6 "6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional case study вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") details our evaluation, describing the tool support provided, and the two case studies. Finally, SectionВ LABEL:sec:relatedwork covers related work, and SectionВ LABEL:sec:discussion concludes the paper with a brief summary and a discussion of directions for future work.

## 2 Running example

To illustrate the concepts, notation, methods, and application of our SLEEC framework, we use as a running example a firefighting UAV inspired by recent research on the use of drones to help tackle wildfires and urban firesВ alon2021drones; cervantes2018conceptual; innocente2019self. We consider that this UAV is tasked with: (i)В using a thermal camera to detect a potential fire at a warehouse; (ii)В determining the precise location of the fireВ (with its depth camera) to report to a human teleoperator; and (iii)В using an onboard water spraying system to control the fire until the arrival of the fire brigade.

In addition to these functional goals, we suppose that the firefighter UAV from our running example needs to consider SLEEC concerns arising from its interactions with human firefighters, bystanders and teleoperators. For example, we assume that the UAV has an alarm which sounds when the battery is running low. However, there are social concerns about sounding a loud alarm too close to a human. As another example, we consider that reporting a (potential) fire involves sending video footage of the surveyed building to teleoperators. If, however, bystanders are present in the vicinity of the building, including them in this footage can raise legal and/or ethical privacy concerns. We explain the UAV capabilities and the associated SLEEC concerns in detail as we introduce our SLEEC notation and its semantics in the next sections.

## 3 The SLEECВ Language

Our framework supports the definition of SLEEC rules for an autonomous agent by using a domain-specific language whose syntax is defined in FigureВ [1](#S3.F1 "Figure 1 вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). The set of SLEEC rules for an agent is provided in this language as a specification comprising two blocks. The first blockВ (an element of the syntactic categoryВ defBlock) provides definitions for the functional capabilities and parameters of the agent. The second blockВ (ruleBlock) defines the actual SLEEC rules in terms of those capabilities and parameters. These blocks are described next.

  

specification

::=

defBlock ruleBlock

defBlock

::=

def\_start definitions def\_end

definitions

::=

definition | definition definitions

definition

::=

event eventID | measure measureID : type | constant constID \[= value\]

type

::=

boolean | numeric | scale(scaleParams)

scaleParams

::=

literal | literal, scaleParams

ruleBlock

::=

rule\_start rules rule\_end

rules

::=

rule | rule rules

rule

::=

ruleID when trigger then response

trigger

::=

eventID | eventID and mBoolExpr

mBoolExpr

::=

measureID | not mBoolExpr | (mBoolExpr) | mBoolExpr relOp value |

mBoolExpr boolOp boolValue

response

::=

constraint \[defeaters\] | { constraint \[defeaters\] }

constraint

::=

eventID \[within value timeUnit \[otherwise response\]\]

| not eventID within value timeUnit

defeaters

::=

defeater | defeater defeaters

defeater

::=

unless mBoolExpr \[then response\]

relOp

::=

< | \> | <\> | <= | \>= | \=

boolOp

::=

and | or

Figure 1: BNF syntax of the SLEECВ language

### 3.1 The definitions block

The definitions blockВ (delimited by the keyword pair defВ startвҖҰdefВ end) comprises declarations of events and measures that represent capabilities of the agent, and constants that represent parameters of the agent. Events and measures correspond to interactions between the agent and the environment, including any humans, to reflect aspects of the environment that are perceptible or affected by the agent. Measures differ from events in that they carry values, communicated to the agent on demand. A measure corresponds to a query that is always responsive. An event is an atomic interactionВ (input or output) that happens sporadically.

A constant represents a value for some parameter of the system configuration; its specific value may or may not be defined. If a value is not defined, the constant represents, for instance, a parameter that is defined at deployment time to reflect the hardware or environment in which the system is deployed, or the preferences of its user.

###### Example 3.1.

An example of a definition block for our firefighter UAV is shown in ListingВ [1](#LST1 "Listing 1 вҖЈ 3.1 The definitions block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). BatteryCritical is an event that occurs when the battery is very low. This is an abstraction for a battery sensor that provides input to the UAV regarding its own hardware. CameraStart represents an interaction with a teleoperator, who can turn on the camera and start recording. SoundAlarm is associated with a loudspeaker that the UAV can use to sound an alarm. Finally, GoHome represents a navigation capability of the UAV, provided by its motors and the embedded software for using these motors to return the UAV to a home location.

In addition, the SLEEC definition block from ListingВ [1](#LST1 "Listing 1 вҖЈ 3.1 The definitions block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") defines three measures. The first, personNearby, communicates a boolean to indicate whether, using its cameras and associated vision software, the firefighter UAV has detected the presence of a person. Whenever that information is needed, the agent can use the personNearby measure to obtain it. We declare also two measures for the temperature of the air, and the windSpeed level. Finally, the constant ALARMВ DEADLINE records a вҖңtime budgetвҖқ for the alarm to sound. We do not give its value in the specification, as we assume it is dependent on the actual deployment of the UAV.

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,ZGVmX3N0YXJ0CiAgZXZlbnQgQmF0dGVyeUNyaXRpY2FsCiAgZXZlbnQgQ2FtZXJhU3RhcnQKICBldmVudCBTb3VuZEFsYXJtCiAgZXZlbnQgR29Ib21lCiAgbWVhc3VyZSBwZXJzb25OZWFyYnk6IGJvb2xlYW4KICBtZWFzdXJlIHRlbXBlcmF0dXJlOiBudW1lcmljCiAgbWVhc3VyZSB3aW5kU3BlZWQ6IHNjYWxlKGxpZ2h0LG1vZGVyYXRlLHN0cm9uZykKICBjb25zdGFudCBBTEFSTV9ERUFETElORQpkZWZfZW5k)

def\_start

В В eventВ BatteryCritical

В В eventВ CameraStart

В В eventВ SoundAlarm

В В eventВ GoHome

В В measureВ personNearby:В boolean

В В measureВ temperature:В numeric

В В measureВ windSpeed:В scale(light,moderate,strong)

В В constantВ ALARM\_DEADLINE

def\_end

ListingВ 1: Definition block for our firefighter robot.

In summary, an event can be issued by an agent; GoHome is an example. Alternatively, an event can be a request issued by a user, such as CameraStart, or an input from another system component, such as BatteryCritical. Measures, on the other hand, provide to the agent information about the state of the system. Some measures may be known with a high degree of certainty from sensors, such as a temperature sensor or a heart-rate monitor. Others may be inferred from indirect measures or indeed the fusion of multiple sensors. For instance, a userвҖҷs level of distress may be inferred from heart-rate monitors, images of the userвҖҷs facial expression, and their tone of voice.

Events, measures, and constants have a unique identifierВ (eventID, measureID, and constID). By convention, we use identifiers starting with a capital letter for events, and with a lowercase letter for measures. For constants, we use identifiers all in capitals. A measure declaration also defines the type of the values it communicates. The supported types are boolean, numeric, and ordinal scales, which introduce some literals and define an order among them. In our example, we have scale(light,moderate, strong) with the implicit order light < moderate < strong.

### 3.2 The rules block

SLEEC rules are defined in a ruleBlockВ (delimited by the keywords ruleВ startвҖҰruleВ end). A rule has an identifierВ (ruleID), a trigger, and a response. A trigger is an event and, optionally, a condition (i.e., a Boolean expression) over measuresВ (mBoolExpr); when the event in the trigger occurs and the condition, if any, is satisfied, then the rule specifies the required response which defines a constraint indicating the event(s) that must or must not occur. The Boolean expression over measures can include conjunctionsВ (and), disjunctionsВ (or), and equalities and inequalitiesВ (relOp) over numeric and scale measures and relevant values.

###### Example 3.2.

In ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), Rule1 is concerned with the privacy of persons near the firefighter UAV, when its camera starts recording. The trigger of Rule1 has the event CameraStart and a condition requiring the value of the measure personNearby to be true. The response, in this case, consists of a constraint that requires SoundAlarm to occur, to warn the person that recording is underway.

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,cnVsZV9zdGFydAogIFJ1bGUxIHdoZW4gQ2FtZXJhU3RhcnQgYW5kIHBlcnNvbk5lYXJieQogICAgICAgIHRoZW4gU291bmRBbGFybQogIFJ1bGUyIHdoZW4gQ2FtZXJhU3RhcnQgYW5kIHBlcnNvbk5lYXJieQogICAgICAgIHRoZW4gU291bmRBbGFybSB3aXRoaW4gMiBzZWNvbmRzCiAgUnVsZTMgd2hlbiBTb3VuZEFsYXJtCiAgICAgICAgdGhlbiBub3QgR29Ib21lIHdpdGhpbiA1IG1pbnV0ZXMKICBSdWxlNCB3aGVuIENhbWVyYVN0YXJ0IHRoZW4gU291bmRBbGFybQogICAgICAgIHVubGVzcyBwZXJzb25OZWFyYnkgdGhlbiBHb0hvbWUKICAgICAgICB1bmxlc3MgdGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgPiAzNQpydWxlX2VuZA==)

rule\_start

В В Rule1В whenВ CameraStartВ andВ personNearby

В В В В В В В В thenВ SoundAlarm

В В Rule2В whenВ CameraStartВ andВ personNearby

В В В В В В В В thenВ SoundAlarmВ withinВ 2В seconds

В В Rule3В whenВ SoundAlarm

В В В В В В В В thenВ notВ GoHomeВ withinВ 5В minutes

В В Rule4В whenВ CameraStartВ thenВ SoundAlarm

В В В В В В В В unlessВ personNearbyВ thenВ GoHome

В В В В В В В В unlessВ temperatureВ \>В 35

rule\_end

ListingВ 2: Sample SLEEC rules for a firefighter UAV

A distinctive feature of our SLEEC language is that it can specify time constraints:В time budgets for responses and required alternative responses in the case of a timeout. A time budget is specified using the within construct. The timeUnit is provided based on the context under consideration.

###### Example 3.3.

In ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), Rule2 is a more specific variant of Rule1. It has the same trigger as Rule1, but gives a time budget for the response:В it must happen within 2 seconds. After all, if the person is not warned early enough, the recording might already have violated their privacy by the time the alarm sounds.

For situations where the response event may not happen within its budget, i.e., when there is a timeout, the otherwise construct can be used to define an alternative response.

###### Example 3.4.

Revisiting Rule2 from ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we may realise that achieving SoundAlarm within 2В seconds is not guaranteed. The loudspeakers may be broken, or another SLEEC rule may specify that sounding the alarm is not a socially or ethically acceptable course of action, e.g., because the person is too close to the UAV. In this case, an alternative can be provided as shown in Rule2В a from ListingВ [3](#LST3 "Listing 3 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). Here, the UAV is required to return to baseВ (GoHome) if the alarm cannot be sounded within 2В seconds.

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,ICBSdWxlMl9hIHdoZW4gQ2FtZXJhU3RhcnQgYW5kIHBlcnNvbk5lYXJieQogICAgICAgICAgdGhlbiBTb3VuZEFsYXJtIHdpdGhpbiAyIHNlY29uZHMKICAgICAgICAgIG90aGVyd2lzZSBHb0hvbWU=)

В В Rule2\_aВ whenВ CameraStartВ andВ personNearby

В В В В В В В В В В thenВ SoundAlarmВ withinВ 2В seconds

В В В В В В В В В В otherwiseВ GoHome

ListingВ 3: Extended version of Rule2 with otherwise construct

Thus, the otherwise construct allows us to provide a different response, in the particular case of a timeout arising from the definition of a related within.

Another form of constraint requires an event not to happen. In this case, a time budget must be defined via the within construct, so as to not permanently disable the event.

###### Example 3.5.

Rule3 from ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") is triggered when SoundAlarm happens. In this case, for social reasons, the вҖңoutputвҖқ event GoHome is blocked for 5В minutes. It may be the case, for example, that the teleoperators are in the home region, and the UAV should not come close to them while the alarm is sounding.

The environment in which an autonomous agent is deployed is generally highly complex and the assumptions that underpin SLEEC rules may be invalid under certain conditions. To support resilience in such environments, we allow for the use of defeasible reasoning when there are scenarios leading to reasons that outweigh or disable a constraintВ Brunero22DefeasingL. Defeasible reasoning is supported in our SLEEC language via unless clauses, which allow normative rules to be be modified in light of additional information obtained from measures.

###### Example 3.6.

ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") presents a Rule4 for constraining CameraStart with a view different from that in the previous rules. In Rule4, CameraStart is required to lead to SoundAlarm. We have, however, an unless clause with a condition depending on the value of the Boolean measure personNearby. If this measure is true, then Rule4 requires the UAV to GoHome, so as to avoid the anti-social action of sounding an alarm near a person, likely a human firefighter. This is, however, once again defeated by a second unless clause based on the temperature measure. If this measure is greater than 35вҲҳC, no response is required. That is because such a high temperature is deemed an indication that there is a fire nearby, which trumps the legal/ethical concerns about filming a bystander, and the firefighter UAV is permitted to use its camera without restrictions.

Overall, multiple defeaters (grouped, if needed, within curly brackets {вҖҰ} to indicate the constraint they apply to) alongside time constrains and timeouts can be defined in SLEEC rules. So, the semantics of the rules (formalised in the next section) can be rather subtle, and the interactions between multiple rules can be unexpected.

## 4 SLEEC Semantics

Table 1: List of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP operators, with basic processes at the top, followed by composite processes:В P and Q are metavariables that stand for processes, d for a numeric expression, e for an event, a and c for channels, x for a variable, I for a set, v for an expression, g for a condition, and X for a set of events. For a channel c, {|вҒўcвҒў|} is a set of events; if c is a typed channel then events are constructed using the dot notation, so that {|вҒўcвҒў|}\={|вҒўc.v0,вҖҰ,c.vnвҒў|}, where vi ranges over the type of c.

Process

Description

Skip

Termination: terminates immediately

рқҗ–рқҗҡрқҗўрқҗӯвҒў(d)

Delay: terminates exactly after d units of time have elapsed

eвҶ’P

Prefix operator: initially offers to engage in the event e while permitting any amount of time to pass, and then behaves as P

aвҒў?вҒўxвҶ’P

Input prefix: same as above, but offers to engage on channel a with any value, and stores the chosen value in x

aвҒў?вҒўx:IвҶ’P

Restricted input prefix: same as above, but restricts the value of x to those in the set I

a!вҒўvвҶ’P

Output prefix: same as above, but initially offers to engage on channel a with a value v

ifg thenP elseQ

Conditional: behaves as P if the predicate g is true, and otherwise as Q

PвҒўQ

External choice of P or Q made by the environment

P;Q

Sequence: behaves as P until it terminates successfully, and, then it behaves as Q

P\\X

Hiding: behaves like P but with all communications in the set X hidden

P|||Q

Interleaving: P and Q run in parallel and do not interact with each other

P|\[X\]|Q

Generalised parallel: P and Q must synchronise on events that belong to the set X, with termination occurring only when both P and Q agree to terminate

Pв–іQ

Interrupt: behaves as P until an event offered by Q occurs, and then behaves as Q

Pв–іdQ

Strict timed interrupt: behaves as P, and, after exactly d time units behaves as Q

dв—ҖP

Deadline for visible interaction: engages in an event of P in at most d time units

i:IвҒў@вҒўPвҒў(i)

Replicated external choice: offers an external choice over processes PвҒў(i) for all i in I

Table 2: Rules that define a tock-CSP semantics for SLEEC. We use the following metavariables in the definitions of the rules:В рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝ as a metavariable to stand for an element of the syntactic category рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Ӯрқ—Үрқ—Ӯрқ—Қрқ—Ӯрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ң, рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ–І to stand for an element of рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Ӯрқ—Үрқ—Ӯрқ—Қрқ—Ӯрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ң, рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј for an рқ–ҫрқ—Ҹрқ–ҫрқ—Үрқ—Қрқ–Ёрқ–Ј, рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј for a рқ—Ҷрқ–ҫрқ–әрқ—Ңрқ—Һрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј, рқ–і for a рқ—Қрқ—’рқ—үрқ–ҫ, рқ–јрқ–Ёрқ–Ј for a рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—Қрқ–Ёрқ–Ј, рқ—Ҹ for a рқ—Ҹрқ–әрқ—…рқ—Һрқ–ҫ, рқ—Ңрқ—ү and subscripted counterparts for a рқ—Ңрқ–јрқ–әрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ–Ҝрқ–әрқ—Ӣрқ–әрқ—Ҷрқ—Ң,рқ—Ӣ for a рқ—Ӣрқ—Һрқ—…рқ–ҫ, рқ—Ӣрқ—Ӣрқ–І for an element of рқ—Ӣрқ—Һрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ң, рқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј for a рқ—Ӣрқ—Һрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј, рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ for a рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җрқ—Җрқ–ҫрқ—Ӣ, and finally рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү for a рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ–ҫ. These metavariables are also used in rules in TablesВ [3](#S4.T3 "Table 3 вҖЈ 4.3 Triggers вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") and [4](#S4.T4 "Table 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents").

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝВ startВ вҒўрқ–Ҫрқ–ЎвҒўВ defВ рқ–ҫрқ—Үрқ–ҪвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ—Һрқ—…рқ–ҫВ startВ вҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ЎвҒўВ ruleВ рқ–ҫрқ—Үрқ–Ҫ\]\]рқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–Ў\]\]рқ–Јрқ–ІвҒў\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–Ў\]\]рқ–ұрқ–І

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝ\]\]рқ–Јрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝ\]\]рқ–Ј

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝвҒўрқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ–І\]\]рқ–Јрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝ\]\]рқ–ЈвҒў\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ–І\]\]рқ–Јрқ–І

\[\[eventВ вҒўрқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–Ј

\=

рқҗңрқҗЎрқҗҡрқҗ§рқҗ§рқҗһрқҗҘвҒўрқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј

\[\[measureВ рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј:рқ–і\]\]рқ–Ј

\=

рқҗңрқҗЎрқҗҡрқҗ§рқҗ§рқҗһрқҗҘвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј:\[\[рқ–і,рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–і

\[\[constantВ вҒўрқ–јрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=рқ—Ҹ\]\]рқ–Ј

\=

рқ–јрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=рқ—Ҹ

\[\[рқ–»рқ—Ҳрқ—Ҳрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ–әрқ—Ү,рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–і

\=

Bool

\[\[рқ—Үрқ—Һрқ—Ҷрқ–ҫрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ–ј,рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–і

\=

Int

\[\[рқ—Ңрқ–јрқ–әрқ—…рқ–ҫвҒў(рқ—Ңрқ—үрқҹЈ,вҖҰ,рқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ү),рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–і

\=

SвҒўTвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј

рқҗқрқҗҡрқҗӯрқҗҡрқҗӯрқҗІрқҗ©рқҗһвҒўSвҒўTвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=рқ—Ңрқ—үрқҹЈвҒўвҲЈвҖҰвҲЈвҒўрқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ү

SвҒўTвҒўlвҒўeвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒў(vвҒў1вҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј,vвҒў2вҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј)\=В ifВ v1рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=\=рқ—Ңрқ—үрқҹЈВ thenВ trueВ else(В ifv1рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=\=рқ—Ңрқ—үрқҹӨВ thenv2рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҲү{рқ—Ңрқ—үрқҹЈ}В elseвҒўвҖҰВ elsev2рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=\=рқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ү)

\[\[рқ—Ӣ\]\]рқ–ұрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ—Ӣ\]\]рқ–ұ

\[\[рқ—ӢвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–І\]\]рқ–ұрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ—Ӣ\]\]рқ–ұвҒў\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–І\]\]рқ–ұрқ–І

\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўwhenВ вҒўрқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—ҖвҒўthenВ вҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ұ

\=

рқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј;MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј;рқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј

TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=\[\[рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү),В Skip,TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ

MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\=\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү),MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

This section defines the semantics of SLEEC using the process algebra tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP, a timed variant of CSPВ Ros98. CSP is part of a large family of notations for specifying concurrent systemsВ Mil83; Mil99; BK85, and is distinctive in its denotational semantics, giving rise to notions of refinement useful for stepwise development. A powerful model checker called FDRВ FDR supports the validation and verification of CSP (and tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP) specifications.

In SectionВ [4.1](#S4.SS1 "4.1 Overview of рқ‘ЎвҒўрқ‘ңвҒўрқ‘җвҒўрқ‘ҳ-CSP вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we give a brief introduction to tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP. SectionВ [4.2](#S4.SS2 "4.2 Overview of SLEEC semantics вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") gives an overview of our semantics, with an example. The detailed semantics of SLEEC triggers and responses are described in SectionsВ [4.3](#S4.SS3 "4.3 Triggers вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") and [4.4](#S4.SS4 "4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), respectively.

### 4.1 Overview of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP

CSP processes specify patterns of interaction via synchronisation on channels, taking into account (non)determinism, deadlock, and termination. Communications between parallel processes and with the environment are achieved via channels. These communications are instantaneous, atomic CSP events, that can carry values:В inputs and outputs. The dialect tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP, in addition, allows processes to specify time budgets and deadlines using a special CSP event called tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk.

In TableВ [1](#S4.T1 "Table 1 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") we summarise the tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP operators that we use in this paper. To illustrate the notation we present a tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP process for a UAV firefighterвҖҷs autopilot.

###### Example 4.1.

In this example, we define a process AвҒўP to model a simple autopilot. We use events NвҒўaвҒўvвҒўiвҒўgвҒўaвҒўtвҒўe and TвҒўrвҒўaвҒўcвҒўk to represent capabilities of the drone to move to an area of interestВ (NвҒўaвҒўvвҒўiвҒўgвҒўaвҒўtвҒўe) and then searchВ (TвҒўrвҒўaвҒўcвҒўk) a fire. In AвҒўP, we specify that the autopilot first accepts a request to NвҒўaвҒўvвҒўiвҒўgвҒўaвҒўtвҒўe and thenВ (вҶ’) starts TвҒўrвҒўaвҒўcвҒўking. When a fire is found, AвҒўP behaves as defined in the process FвҒўIвҒўRвҒўE. When FвҒўIвҒўRвҒўE terminates, in sequenceВ (;) AвҒўP recurses.

AP\=NavigateвҶ’TrackвҶ’FIRE;APFIRE\=0в—Җ(temperature?tвҶ’В ifвҒўt\>35В thenвҒўвҖү1в—Җ(SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўFвҒўiвҒўrвҒўeвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўmвҶ’В Skip)В elseВ Skip)

In FвҒўIвҒўRвҒўE the autopilot reads a value t using a channel tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeВ (tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў?вҒўt), and then behaves as defined by a conditional. The process with the communication tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў?вҒўt follow by the conditional is the argument of the operatorВ (в—Җ) that defines a deadline, here 0, for that process to exhibit visible behaviour. The deadline defines the number of time units that can pass, that is, the number of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk events that can occur, before the visible behaviour happens. With the deadline 0, we specify that the input must happen immediately:В no tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk events are allowed before the communication on the channel tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe occurs. In the conditional, if the temperature read (t) is greater than 35 Celsius, then an event SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўFвҒўiвҒўrвҒўeвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm is required to happen in at most 1В time unit. So, SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўFвҒўiвҒўrвҒўeвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm can happen before a tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk or after at most one tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk. Afterwards, FвҒўIвҒўRвҒўE terminatesВ (SвҒўkвҒўiвҒўp) immediately:В no more tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk events can happen. If t is less than or equal to 35, FвҒўIвҒўRвҒўE just terminates.

We note that the CSP event tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe corresponds to the SLEEC measure temperature in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). The other events are not mentioned there. In general, we can expect SLEEC rules to be concerned with some, but not all, capabilities of an agent. Verification needs to take that into account, as we discuss in SectionВ [5.3](#S5.SS3 "5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents").

### 4.2 Overview of SLEEC semantics

The semantics of a SLEEC specification from FigureВ [1](#S3.F1 "Figure 1 вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") is given by a function \[\[В \]\]рқ–І defined in TableВ [2](#S4.T2 "Table 2 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). This function maps the specification to a tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP process, and is defined in terms of two other functions, \[\[В \]\]рқ–Јрқ–І and \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–І, that capture the semantics of the definitions dB and rules rB of the specification. The definitions in TableВ [2](#S4.T2 "Table 2 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") are mechanised in our SLEEC toolВ YBJCC23, which automates the generatation of the tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP semantics of a SLEEC specificationВ (see SectionВ [6.1](#S6.SS1 "6.1 SLEEC tool вҖЈ 6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional case study вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")).

The semantics of definitions from FigureВ [1](#S3.F1 "Figure 1 вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") is given by corresponding declarations of channels and constants representing the SLEEC events, measures, and constants. The types boolean and numeric are given semantics as Bool and Int. For a scale type, the semantics is a CSP datatype that declares its literal parameters, and an associated Boolean function to record the order between those literals. A SLEEC constant becomes a CSP constant.

###### Example 4.2.

In FigureВ [2](#S4.F2 "Figure 2 вҖЈ 4.2 Overview of SLEEC semantics вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we present the declarations for the definitions in ListingВ [1](#LST1 "Listing 1 вҖЈ 3.1 The definitions block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). For each event and measure, we have a channel declaration. For the type of the measure windSpeed, we define a datatype SвҒўTвҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd and a Boolean function SвҒўTвҒўlвҒўeвҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd with arguments vвҒў1вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd and vвҒў2вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd (of type SвҒўTвҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd). If vвҒў1вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd is the first literal light, then it is guaranteed to be less than or equal to vвҒў2вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd, no matter the value of vвҒў2вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd. If, however vвҒў1вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd is moderate, then the inequality holds if vвҒў2вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd is not light, since it is then at least moderate as well. Finally, if vвҒў1вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd is strong, then the inequality holds if, and only if, vвҒў2вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd is strong too. For model checking, we need to define a value for the constants. In this example, we use 3 as a time unit for the value of ALARMВ DEADLINE.

В channelBatteryCriticalВ channelCameraStartВ channelSoundAlarmВ channelGoHomeВ channelpersonNearby:В BoolВ channeltemperature:В IntВ channelwindSpeed:STwindSpeedВ datatypeSTwindSpeed\=light|moderate|strongSTlewindSpeed(v1windSpeed,v2windSpeed)\=В ifv1windSpeed\=\=lightВ thenвҒўВ trueВ else(В ifv1windSpeed\=\=moderateВ thenвҒў(vвҒў2вҒўwвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўdвҲү{lвҒўiвҒўgвҒўhвҒўt})В elsev2windSpeed\=\=strong)ALARMВ DEADLINE\=3

Figure 2: CSP declarations for the definitions in ListingВ [1](#LST1 "Listing 1 вҖЈ 3.1 The definitions block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")

The recursive definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–Јрқ–І is given by two equations. For a single definition def, the semantics is given by another function \[\[В \]\]рқ–Ј. For a list of definitions def defS, containing a single definition def followed by a list defS, the semantics is the sequence of CSP declarations determined by \[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝ\]\]рқ–Ј to capture the semantics of def, followed by the CSP declarations defined by a recursive application of \[\[В \]\]рқ–Јрқ–І to defS. We do not consider the empty list of definitions, since a SLEEC specification defines restrictions on the use of the capabilities of the agent, and without a declaration of capabilities, there is no sensible specification.

The equations defining \[\[В \]\]рқ–Ј consider each form of definition in turn. We assume that identifiers in SLEEC satisfy the usual lexical restrictions adopted in CSP, so that, for example, events and measures are represented by channels of the same name. For a constant, we assume that a value is given. The type used in the declaration of a measure is given by the semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–і whose arguments are the type T and the identifier mID of the measure. The equations defining \[\[В \]\]рқ–і for boolean and numeric are straightforward. For a scale type, we use the name of the measure in defining the corresponding CSP declarations.

For simplicity, we use an informal notation to represent a scale type with n parameters sвҒўp1 to sвҒўpn, namely, рқ—Ңрқ–јрқ–әрқ—…рқ–ҫвҒў(рқ—Ңрқ—үрқҹЈ,вҖҰ,рқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ү). The definition of a formal generative function for the semantics of a measure with such a type is, however, straightforward. The name of the datatype defined is that of the measure, that is, the argument mID, prefixed with SвҒўT. The name of the Boolean function that defines its order is prefixed with SвҒўTвҒўlвҒўe instead.

The recursive definition of the semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–І for a list of rules is similar to that of \[\[В \]\]рқ–Јрқ–І, but is based on the semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұ for a rule. The semantics of each rule is given by a process, named after that rule, and defined using two processes that capture the meaning of its trigger and of its response. The process for every rule is defined by composing in sequence a TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr and a MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process. This reflects the fact that a rule imposes no constraints until its trigger is observed. At that point, it monitorsВ (that is, determines) the allowed behaviour to enforce the response.

###### Example 4.3.

For Rule2 in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), the CSP process that defines its semantics is shown in FigureВ [3](#S4.F3 "Figure 3 вҖЈ 4.2 Overview of SLEEC semantics вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). The behaviour of the process RвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2 is initially defined by that of TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2. When the trigger of Rule2 is observed, TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2 terminates (via the Skip from the conditional statement), and the process MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2 takes over. When the response happens, MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2 terminates and RвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2 recurses.

Rule2\=TriggerRule2;MonitoringRule2;Rule2TriggerRule2\=В letMTrigger\=0в—Җ(personNearby?vpersonNearbyвҶ’В ifvpersonNearby\=\=trueВ thenвҒўВ SkipВ elseTriggerRule2)В withinвҒўCвҒўaвҒўmвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўSвҒўtвҒўaвҒўrвҒўtвҶ’MвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrSвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўmвҶ’TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2MonitoringRule2\=2в—Җ(SoundAlarmвҶ’В Skip)

Figure 3: Semantics of Rule2 in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")

In TableВ [2](#S4.T2 "Table 2 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұ uses the identifier rID of the rule to assemble the identifiers of the TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr and MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg processes. The definition of the TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr process is given by the semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ whose arguments are the trigger of the rule, the alphabet of events, that is, the set of all events used in the response of the rule, and two continuation processes. The alphabet of events is given by the function Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү). The first continuation process determines the behaviour when the trigger happens. In the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұ, this is Skip, since the TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr process must terminate in this case. The second continuation process determines the behaviour if the event of the trigger takes place, but its condition does not hold. In the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұ, this is the TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr process itself, since in this case the TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr process must recurse.

To define the MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process, we use the semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І. The first argument is the response that is to be monitored. The subsequent arguments are needed because a defeater may void the monitoring, which then needs to check the trigger again. The extra arguments are the trigger and the alphabet of events used in the response. The final argument of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І is a continuation process, which in the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұ is MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg.

We define \[\[В \]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ next, and \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І in SectionВ [4.4](#S4.SS4 "4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). Those familiar with the use of CSP to specify properties might observe that we do not adopt the usual approach that considers the overall alphabet of events, and defines a rule that imposes no restrictions outside its own alphabet. That approach is convenient for verification by refinement, but does not easily support checks for conflicts and redundancy. With our semantics, we support validation, and, for verification, we adopt a more elaborate notion of correctness, using refinement and priorities (cf.В SectionВ [5](#S5 "5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")).

### 4.3 Triggers

The definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ is given in TableВ [3](#S4.T3 "Table 3 вҖЈ 4.3 Triggers вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). For a trigger that has just an event eID, the process is a synchronisation on that event followed by the argument process sp that defines the continuation when the trigger happens. A choice allows the response events to happen freely, but their occurrence leads to a recursion so that the rule is not enforced if the trigger has not happened.

Table 3: Rules that define a tock-CSP semantics for SLEEC triggers. Additional metavariables used here are as follows:В рқ– рқ–ұ for an alphabetВ (set) of events, рқ—Ңрқ—ү and рқ–ҝрқ—ү for tock-CSP processes, рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө for an рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ—Ҳрқ—Ҳрқ—…рқ–Өрқ—‘рқ—үрқ—Ӣ, and рқ–¬рқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң for a list of рқ—Ҷрқ–ҫрқ–әрқ—Ңрқ—Һрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј elements.

\[\[рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ

\=

рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’рқ—Ңрқ—ү(рқ–ҫ:рқ– рқ–ұ@рқ–ҫвҶ’рқ–ҝрқ—ү)

\[\[рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўandВ вҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ

\=

рқҗҘрқҗһрқҗӯвҒўMвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr\=\[\[Оұрқ–¬рқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө),рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө,рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–¬рқ–ӨВ withinрқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’MTrigger(рқ–ҫ:рқ– рқ–ұ@рқ–ҫвҶ’рқ–ҝрқ—ү)

\[\[вҹЁвҒўвҹ©,рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө,рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө

\=

ifВ вҒўрқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө)вҒўВ thenВ вҒўрқ—Ңрқ—үвҒўВ elseВ вҒўрқ–ҝрқ—ү

\[\[вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўвҹ©рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң,рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө,рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө

\=

0в—Җ(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒў?вҒўvвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’\[\[рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң,рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–ӨвҒў\[vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј/рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\],рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө)

If the trigger has a Boolean expression on measures, the process is defined using let and within clauses. The actual process is defined in the within clause, but in its definition we can use processes named in the let clause. In the process \[\[рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўрқ–әрқ—Үрқ–ҪвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ, we have the synchronisation on eID is followed by a process MвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr, defined in the let clause using a semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө.

###### Example 4.4.

As shown in FigureВ [3](#S4.F3 "Figure 3 вҖЈ 4.2 Overview of SLEEC semantics вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), if the trigger has a Boolean expression on measures, MвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr first reads the values of the measures urgently. For Rule2 in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), the condition is just on the measure personNearby, so MвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr inputs a value vвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўsвҒўoвҒўnвҒўNвҒўeвҒўaвҒўrвҒўbвҒўy using the channel pвҒўeвҒўrвҒўsвҒўoвҒўnвҒўNвҒўeвҒўaвҒўrвҒўbвҒўy. Afterwards, a conditional checks the measure expression. If it holds, the trigger has occurred, and MвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr terminates, leading to TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўrвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2 terminating as well. Otherwise, MвҒўTвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr recurses back to the TвҒўrвҒўiвҒўgвҒўgвҒўeвҒўr process to wait for the trigger event again.

The function \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө takes the list of measures used in the Boolean expression as arguments, that measure condition itself, and the continuation processes. In the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ, the first argument Оұрқ–¬рқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө) of \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө is defined by a function Оұрқ–¬рқ–Ө, similar to Оұ, but providing just measure identifiers used in the Boolean expression.

The inductive definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө considers separately an empty list вҹЁвҒўвҹ© of measures and a list with at least one measure рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј. In the process defined by this function, the value vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј of each measure рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј is read urgently in sequenceВ (вҶ’). That value is then substituted for рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј in the expression рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө. Once all of the measures are input, a conditional checks the value of the resulting expression.

In detail, for a list of identifiers вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўвҹ©рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң, the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө defines a process that reads the value of рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј and records it into a local variable named vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј. To make that urgent, it uses the operator в—Җ with deadline 0 over a process that starts with the communication рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒў?вҒўvвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј. The behaviour that follows is defined by the process characterised by a recursive application of \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө.

In that application of \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө, the remaining measures in рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң are considered. Moreover, the Boolean expression is changed to refer to the variable vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј, where the measure рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј is used. We use рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–ӨвҒў\[vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј/рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\] to denote the Boolean expression obtained by replacing the occurrences of рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј with vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј. In our example semantics for Rule2 in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), personNearby becomes vвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўsвҒўoвҒўnвҒўNвҒўeвҒўaвҒўrвҒўbвҒўy.

If the first argument of \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө is the empty list of measures, then all the relevant measure values have been read, and the Boolean expression is defined in terms of those valuesВ (recorded in local variables). So, \[\[В \]\]рқ–¬рқ–Ө defines a conditional process that specifies the appropriate continuation behaviour depending on the measure condition.

The actual condition evaluated is specified using a normalisation function. In рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө) the SLEEC relational operators applied to literals of scale types in рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө are encoded using the comparator functions of those scale types. (Strictly speaking, рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(В ) requires an extra argument defining the type of the measures and the names of the comparator functions for the scale types.) Additionally, the use of a measure mвҒўIвҒўD as a Boolean is transformed to an equality mID\=\=В true as required by the CSP notation.

### 4.4 Responses

Table 4: Rules for the tock-CSP semantics of SLEEC responses. Additional metavariables used here are:В рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—Қ for a рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ–әрқ—Ӯрқ—Үрқ—Қ, рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І for a set of events, рқ—Ҷрқ—ү for a process, рқ—Қрқ–ҙ for a рқ—Қрқ—Ӯрқ—Ҷрқ–ҫрқ–ҙрқ—Үрқ—Ӯрқ—Қ, рқ—Ү for an indexВ (a natural number), рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң for an element of рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ–ҫрқ–әрқ—Қрқ–ҫрқ—Ӣрқ—Ң, and рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қ for a рқ–Ҫрқ–ҫрқ–ҝрқ–ҫрқ–әрқ—Қрқ–ҫрқ—Ӣ.

\[\[рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—Қ,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—Қ,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ў

\[\[рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—ҚвҒўрқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

В letвҒў\[\[вҹЁвҒўрқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—ҚвҒўвҹ©рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ңрқ–ұрқ–Ҝ,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,рқҹЈ\]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–ІВ withinвҒў\[\[Оұрқ–¬рқ–ӨвҒў(рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң),рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң,#вҒўрқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң+рқҹЈ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І

\[\[рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–Ј,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ў

\=

рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’В Skip

\[\[рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўрқ—җрқ—Ӯрқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ—Ӯрқ—ҮвҒўрқ—ҸвҒўрқ—Қрқ–ҙ,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ў

\=

рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҹ,рқ—Қрқ–ҙ)в—Җ(рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’В Skip)

\[\[рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўрқ—җрқ—Ӯрқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ—Ӯрқ—ҮвҒўрқ—ҸвҒўрқ—Қрқ–ҙвҒўрқ—Ҳрқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ–ҫрқ—Ӣрқ—җрқ—Ӯрқ—Ңрқ–ҫвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ў

\=

(рқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’В Skip)в–ірқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҹ,рқ—Қрқ–ҙ)(\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І)

\[\[рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—ҚвҒўрқ–ҫрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўрқ—җрқ—Ӯрқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ—Ӯрқ—ҮвҒўрқ—ҸвҒўрқ—Қрқ–ҙ,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ў

\=

рқҗ–рқҗҡрқҗўрқҗӯвҒў(рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҹ,рқ—Қрқ–ҙ))

\[\[вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үвҒўвҹ©,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ү\=\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү\]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І,В providedВ рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үвү В NoRep

\[\[вҹЁвҒўВ NoRepвҒўвҹ©,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ү\=\[\[рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ү\]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ(e:рқ– рқ–ұвҒў@вҒўeвҶ’MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ү)

\[\[вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үвҒўвҹ©рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ң,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

\[\[вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үвҒўвҹ©,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І\[\[рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ң,рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җ,рқ– рқ–ұ,рқ—Ҷрқ—ү,рқ—Ү+рқҹЈ\]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І

\[\[вҹЁвҒўвҹ©,рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң,MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў1,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І

\[\[вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўвҹ©рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң,рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

0в—Җ(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒў?вҒўvвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҶ’\[\[рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң,рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—ҢвҒў\[vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј/рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј\],рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І)

\[\[рқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө,рқ–ҝрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

ifВ вҒўрқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө)вҒўВ thenВ вҒўMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—ҮвҒўрқ–ҫрқ—…рқ—Ңрқ–ҫвҒўрқ–ҝрқ—ү

\[\[рқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–ӨвҒўВ thenВ вҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ү,рқ–ҝрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

ifВ вҒўрқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө)вҒўВ thenВ вҒўMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—ҮвҒўрқ–ҫрқ—…рқ—Ңрқ–ҫвҒўрқ–ҝрқ—ү

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—ҢвҒўрқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қ,рқ–ҝрқ—ү,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І

\=

\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қ,\[\[рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң,рқ–ҝрқ—ү,рқ—ҮвҲ’рқҹЈ\]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І,рқ—Ү\]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І

The semantic function \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І for response definitions is specified in TableВ [4](#S4.T4 "Table 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). The semantics of a response enclosed in curly brackets is just the semantics of its constraint and defeaters itself. We omit that simple definition from TableВ [4](#S4.T4 "Table 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). The semantics of a response that has just a constraint is given by the function \[\[В \]\]рқ–ў.

###### Example 4.5.

Rule2 in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") provides an example of a response that has just a constraint, that is, the rule contains no defeaters. The MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process in its semantics, shown in FigureВ [3](#S4.F3 "Figure 3 вҖЈ 4.2 Overview of SLEEC semantics вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), captures the time constraint in the response. It requires that SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm takes place within 2 time units. In this case, we have the assumption that each tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk represents the passage of 1В second.

The SLEEC rules can refer to a variety of time units. To give semantics, we can either assume that tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk represents the passage of a minimal period of time that can be consideredВ (1 millisecond, for example), or calculate the greatest common divisor of all periods of time referenced, and adopt that to define the meaning of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk. Whatever the solution, when using a time period definition we need to normalise the value to describe it in terms of a number of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk events. For instance, if tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk is deemed to represent a second, then вҖң1 minuteвҖқ should be normalised to 60.

The definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ў has one equation for each possible form of constraint. If it is just an event, the constraint process defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–ў requires that event to be accepted and then terminates. We recall that termination indicates that the constraint has been satisfied, and the rule process can recurse and wait for the next trigger.

If there is a time budget рқ—җрқ—Ӯрқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ—Ӯрқ—ҮвҒўрқ—ҸвҒўрқ—Қрқ–ҙ defining a number рқ—Ҹ of time units given by рқ—Қрқ–ҙ, then the process for the event is included in an в—Җ. The deadline рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҹ,рқ—Қрқ–ҙ) is determined using a normalisation function to calculate the number of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk events allowed, as explained above.

If the possibility of a timeout is considered, via an otherwise clause, instead of a в—Җ, we use a timed interruptВ (в–іd) to specify that, if the budget рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҹ,рқ—Қрқ–ҙ) is used up, the process that captures the semantics of the response associated with the otherwise takes over.

###### Example 4.6.

The MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў2вҒўВ вҒўa process for the SLEEC Rule2В a in ListingВ [3](#LST3 "Listing 3 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") is shown below.

(SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўmвҶ’В Skip)в–і2(GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўeвҶ’В Skip)

If after 2 seconds, for whatever reason, the alarm cannot be sounded, then GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe is required.

Finally, for a constraint that forbids the occurrence of an event, the semantics is the process В WaitвҒў(рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҹ,рқ—Қрқ–ҙ)) that pauses:В only allows time to pass, that is, tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk events to happen, for рқ—ҸвҒўрқ—Қрқ–ҙ time units, and then terminates.

If a response has one or more defeaters, \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І defines a process using let and within clauses. The let clause defines a number of local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg processes used in the within clause to define the overall MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process.

###### Example 4.7.

Consider the simpler version of Rule4 in ListingВ [4](#LST4 "Listing 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). Its MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process is as follows.

В letMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў1\=SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўmвҶ’В SkipMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў2\=GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўeвҶ’В SkipвҒўВ within0в—Җ(personNearby?vpersonNearbyвҶ’В ifvpersonNearby\=\=В trueВ thenMonitoring2В elseMonitoring1)

The constraint in the then clause and the response in the unless clause are captured by local processes MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў1 and MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў2. In the within clause, after reading the relevant measures, the process chooses a local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process based on the unless condition.

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,ICBSdWxlNF9hIHdoZW4gQ2FtZXJhU3RhcnQgdGhlbiBTb3VuZEFsYXJtCiAgICAgICAgICB1bmxlc3MgcGVyc29uTmVhcmJ5IHRoZW4gR29Ib21l)

В В Rule4\_aВ whenВ CameraStartВ thenВ SoundAlarm

В В В В В В В В В В unlessВ personNearbyВ thenВ GoHome

ListingВ 4: Simpler version of Rule4

The local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg processes are defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І, which takes as argument a list containing the constraint of the response, and the responses in the defeaters dfts. We use рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ңрқ–ұрқ–Ҝ to represent the list of those responses. For an unless defeater without a response, we get NoRep. This is a special response defined in the semantics just for the purposes of simplifying the semantic rules. The additional arguments of \[\[В \]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І are the extra arguments of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І, and a counter for the MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg processes used to define their names. In the definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І, we define the (initial) value of the counter as 1.

The definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І has two equations for a singleton list of responses, and a third equation for a list вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үвҒўвҹ©рқ—Ӣрқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—үрқ—Ң starting with a response resp followed by a list resps. For a singleton list with a proper response resp, the MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process is defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І. For the special response NoRep, we need to consider the trigger.

###### Example 4.8.

The MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process for Rule4 in ListingВ [4](#LST4 "Listing 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") is shown below. It is similar to that in ExampleВ [4.7](#S4.Thmexample7 "Example 4.7. вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), but has an extra local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3 process since we have an extra unless clause. In the within clause, both relevant measures are read urgently, and then conditionals identify the right local process to monitor the behaviour.

В letMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў1\=SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўmвҶ’В SkipMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў2\=GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўeвҶ’В SkipMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3\=CвҒўaвҒўmвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўSвҒўtвҒўaвҒўrвҒўtвҶ’MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў4SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўmвҶ’MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўeвҶ’MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3вҒўВ within0в—Җ(personNearby?vpersonNearbyвҶ’0в—Җ(temperature?vpersonNearbyвҶ’В ifвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe\>35вҒўВ thenвҒўMвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3В else(В ifvpersonNearby\=\=В trueВ thenMonitoring2В elseMonitoring1)))

MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3 corresponds to the unless clause for the condition temperature \> 35, which does not have an associated response. The meaning in this case is that the rule imposes no restrictions. So, all CSP events used in the rule semantics need to be allowed. In the example, the MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3 process needs to offer the choiceВ () of all CSP events corresponding to the events used in Rule4. For the event in the trigger, its occurrence leads to the outer MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў4 process taking over. For all other events, MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3 simply recurses:В MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў3 does not block these events, but ignores them by just proceeding.

As illustrated, the definition of a local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process for an unless clause without a response, that is, with a response NoRep, requires information about the trigger of the overall rule, its alphabet, and the overall MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process. These are the extra arguments of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ў and \[\[В \]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І.

For a response NoRep, the local process MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ү defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І, when applied to a counter value рқ—Ү, is specified as a choice over a trigger process characterised by \[\[В \]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ and a choice of events e from the alphabet рқ– рқ–ұ of the rule given as argument. In every choice, such an event e is followed by a recursion. In our example above, рқ– рқ–ұ contains SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm and GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe. The arguments of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ірқ–Ұ are the рқ—Қрқ—Ӣрқ—Ӯрқ—Җger, the process рқ—Ҷрқ—ү, providing the continuation in case the trigger occurs, and the process MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒўрқ—Ү, the continuation if the trigger does not occurs. We recall that \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұ defines рқ—Ҷрқ—ү as the MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process for the rule.

The process in the within clause of a response processВ (as defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І) is specified by a \[\[В \]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І function. Its arguments are the alphabet ОұMвҒўEвҒў(рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң) of measures of the defeaters рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң, the defeaters рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң themselves, and the number of responses to be handled, namely, the number #вҒўdвҒўfвҒўtвҒўs of defeaters, plus 1, to consider the рқ–јрқ—Ҳрқ—Үрқ—Ңрқ—Қraint in the rule overall response. The definition of ОұMвҒўEвҒў(рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—Ң) is similar to that of ОұMвҒўEвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө), but applies to a list of defeaters, considering the Boolean expressions that they use.

The inductive definition of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І is simple. For a list of measures вҹЁвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–ЈвҒўвҹ©рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң, the process inputs the values vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј or the measure urgently and then behaves as the process defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І for рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Јрқ—Ң. In the defeaters used as argument for the recursive application of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ўрқ–Јрқ–І, the references to рқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј are replaced with vвҒўрқ—Ҷрқ–Ёрқ–Ј. In ExampleВ [4.8](#S4.Thmexample8 "Example 4.8. вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), this defines the two urgent communications to input values of the measures personNearby and temperature.

For an empty list of measures, the process is defined by \[\[В \]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І. This is again an inductive definition, whose arguments are the list of defeaters, the local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў1 process that applies when no defeater in the list does, and the number of defeaters in that list. We recall that MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўgвҒў1 is the process that captures the behaviour of the overall constraint of the ruleВ (see definitions of \[\[В \]\]рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І and \[\[В \]\]рқ–«рқ–ұрқ–Јрқ–І). If the list of defeaters рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қрқ—ҢвҒўрқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қ has more than than one defeater, the result is the application of \[\[В \]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І to the last defeater, whose monitoring process is given by a recursive application of \[\[В \]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І to define a process for the other defeaters, which applies when рқ–Ҫрқ–ҝрқ—Қ does not.

If we have just one defeater, then the process is a conditional that checks whether its condition applies. It it does, the local MвҒўoвҒўnвҒўiвҒўtвҒўoвҒўrвҒўiвҒўnвҒўg process identified by the counter рқ—Ү is used. Otherwise, the continuation process рқ–ҝрқ—ү is used.

###### Example 4.9.

We show below the use of \[\[В \]\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І to define the conditional in ExampleВ [4.8](#S4.Thmexample8 "Example 4.8. вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents").

\[вҖӢ\[вҒўрқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢВ vpersonNearbyВ рқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ–ҫрқ—ҮВ рқ–Ұрқ—Ҳрқ–§рқ—Ҳрқ—Ҷрқ–ҫрқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢВ vtemperature Вҝ 35,Monitoring1, 3В \]вҖӢ\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І\=В \[вҖӢ\[вҒўрқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢВ vtemperature Вҝ 35,\[вҖӢ\[рқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢВ vpersonNearbyВ рқ—Қрқ—Ғрқ–ҫрқ—ҮВ рқ–Ұрқ—Ҳрқ–§рқ—Ҳрқ—Ҷрқ–ҫ, Monitoring1, 2В \]вҖӢ\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–ІвҒў,3В \]вҖӢ\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І\=В \[вҖӢ\[вҒўрқ—Һрқ—Үрқ—…рқ–ҫрқ—Ңрқ—ҢВ vtemperature Вҝ 35,(вҒўрқҗўрқҗҹВ vpersonNearby == trueрқҗӯрқҗЎрқҗһрқҗ§В Monitoring2В В elseВ Monitoring1В В ),3В \]вҖӢ\]рқ–Өрқ–Јрқ–І\=В вҒўрқҗўрқҗҹВ vtemperature Вҝ 35рқҗӯрқҗЎрқҗһрқҗ§В Monitoring3рқҗһрқҗҘрқҗ¬рқҗһВ (вҒўрқҗўрқҗҹВ vpersonNearby == trueрқҗӯрқҗЎрқҗһрқҗ§В Monitoring2В В elseВ Monitoring1В В )

Additional examples are provided in the next sections.

## 5 Validation and Verification

When writing SLEEC rules, it is possible to make a mistake and introduce redundant or conflicting rules, especially given the possibility that these rules are provided by stakeholders with different expertise (lawyers, ethicists, sociologists, etc.) and comprise complex defeaters. Redundant rules may help stakeholders to understand the consequences of the rules; for verification, however, these rules are unnecessary and so should be flagged. Conflicting rules, on the other hand, mean that there is no implementation that can satisfy them all. They need to be flagged and the conflict needs to be resolved. In SectionВ [5.1](#S5.SS1 "5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we present an approach that uses the semantics of our rules presented above to detect conflicts, and in SectionВ [5.3](#S5.SS3 "5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we present redundancy checks. Finally, in SectionВ [5.3](#S5.SS3 "5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we discuss the verification of an agent model against a set of SLEEC rules.

### 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection

Two rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ are conflict free if there is no scenario in which both rules apply and the restriction of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ makes it not possible to satisfy the restriction of рқ—ӢрқҹӨ, or vice-versa. Conjunction is specified in CSP using parallelism. So, roughly speaking, conflict freedom requires the process formed by the parallel combination of the processes for рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ never to reach a state in which the only event that can happen, if any, is tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk. In this case, a system that satisfies both rules cannot make useful progress.

In practical terms, we only need to check for conflict between rules that have an overlap in their alphabet of events. If the rules have no such overlap, the restrictions they impose cannot interfere with each other. Moreover, overlap in the alphabet of measures is irrelevant, as rules do not need to agree on the reading of measures. The measures represent information about the system and the environment that is available at any time.

TableВ [5](#S5.T5 "Table 5 вҖЈ 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") presents the function \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ, which defines the conjunction process рқ—Ӯрқ–Ҫрқ–ўрқ–ўвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ) for the rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ. In the within clause of this definition, we compose the processes рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ) and рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹӨ) (which define the semantics of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ) in parallelВ (|\[вҖҰ\]|), synchronising on their common alphabet of events, i.e., on the intersection alphabetsВ Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ)вҲ©Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹӨ) of their alphabets.

An additional parallel process EвҒўnвҒўv captures the environment in which the rules are considered, by recording the values of the measures for sharing between рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ) and рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹӨ). The definition of EвҒўnвҒўv is given in the let clause as the interleaving, that is, the parallel combination without synchronisation, of processes EвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫ for each event рқ–ҫ in the alphabet of measures Оұрқ–¬вҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ) of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ. These processes input the value of the measure рқ–ҫ when a rule first requires that measureВ (рқ–ҫ?x). They then record the value x input as a parameter for another process VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫ, which outputs xВ (рқ–ҫ!вҒўрқ—‘) whenever a rule needs that measure. With EвҒўnвҒўv we ensure that, for conflict checking, the rules are considered when the measures take the same value.

Using \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ, we define conflict freedom for the rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ below. For that, we use the process operator вҖҳPaftertвҖҷ, which defines the process that behaves like P after it has already engaged in its trace of events t.

###### Definition 5.1.

The rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ are conflict free, if, and only if, for every trace t1 of \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ, there is a trace t2 of \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝaftert1 that contains at least one tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk and at least one event different from tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk.

Table 5: Conjunction of rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ

\[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ

\=

рқ—Ӯрқ–Ҫрқ–ўрқ–ўвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ)\=В letEвҒўnвҒўv\=|||рқ–ҫ:Оұрқ–¬вҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ)вҒў@вҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫ\=рқ–ҫвҒў?вҒўxвҶ’VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫвҒў(x)VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫвҒў(x)\=рқ–ҫ!вҒўxвҶ’VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўрқ–ҫвҒў(x)В within(рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ)|\[Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ)вҲ©Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹӨ)\]|рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹӨ))|\[Оұрқ–¬вҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ)\]|EвҒўnвҒўv

With this definition, we require that, at no point, enforcing both rules, as defined by the process \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ, leads to a deadlock, so that no more events are possible, or to a situation in which there is no deadlock, but only the passage of time can be observed. The latter scenario is a timed deadlock:В time can progress, but no event is possible.

DefinitionВ [5.1](#S5.Thmdefinition1 "Definition 5.1. вҖЈ 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") is given in terms of the semantics, that is, the set of traces, of the conjunction process \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ. For automation, we can check conflict freedom using FDR using two assertions. The first is a standard FDR assertion for deadlock freedom, and the second is an assertion based on our mechanisation of a timed-deadlock freedom check in the context of tock-CSP that is inspired by work inВ Roscoe2013a.

###### Example 5.1.

ListingВ [5](#LST5 "Listing 5 вҖЈ 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") presents another rule (RuleA) for the firefighter UAV. This rule requires that, if the battery reaches a critical level, and there is no risk of fire nearby, as indicated by the temperature measure, then the robot should return to base so that it can continue to work at a later point. We can imagine that, if there is risk of fire, the UAV should continue its mission even if it means that it will exhaust its battery in action. However, RuleA is in conflict with Rule3 from ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). We show in FigureВ [4](#S5.F4 "Figure 4 вҖЈ 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") the conjunction CSP process for the two rules. In this case, both rules restrict the GoHome event and use just one measure, temperature. So, the EвҒўnвҒўv process is just the EвҒўnвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe process for this measure. The deadlock check (using the FDR model checker) gives a counterexample that indicates the reason for the deadlock. Namely, it provides a trace with the events BвҒўaвҒўtвҒўtвҒўeвҒўrвҒўyвҒўCвҒўrвҒўiвҒўtвҒўiвҒўcвҒўaвҒўl and tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў.20, and after 13 occurrences of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk, then the event SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm, followed by 47 occurrences of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk. In this case, we are identifying a time unit with 1s. So, the counterexample, indicates that if RuleA is triggered, and after 13s, Rule3 is triggered, then, after another 47s, we have a deadlock, as RuleA requires GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe to take place, but Rule3 forbids it.

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,cnVsZV9zdGFydAogIFJ1bGVBIHdoZW4gQmF0dGVyeUNyaXRpY2FsIGFuZCB0ZW1wZXJhdHVyZSA8IDI1CiAgICAgICAgdGhlbiBHb0hvbWUgd2l0aGluIDEgbWludXRlCnJ1bGVfZW5k)

rule\_start

В В RuleAВ whenВ BatteryCriticalВ andВ temperatureВ <В 25

В В В В В В В В thenВ GoHomeВ withinВ 1В minute

rule\_end

ListingВ 5: Conflicting rule for a firefighter robot

RвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒўAвҒўRвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў3\=В letвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe\=tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў?вҒўxвҶ’VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў(x)VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў(x)\=tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe!вҒўxвҶ’VвҒўEвҒўnвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў(x)EвҒўnвҒўv\=EвҒўnвҒўvвҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeВ withinвҒў(RвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒўA|\[{GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe}\]|RвҒўuвҒўlвҒўeвҒў3)|\[{|вҒўtвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў|}\]|EвҒўnвҒўv

Figure 4: Conjunction process for RuleA in ListingВ [5](#LST5 "Listing 5 вҖЈ 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") and Rule3 in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents").

If the assertion for deadlock freedom holds, there is no guarantee that timed deadlock freedom holds.

###### Example 5.2.

ListingВ [6](#LST6 "Listing 6 вҖЈ 5.1 SLEEC conflict detection вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") presents two other conflicting rules for the firefighter UAV. In the case of these rules, their conjunction does not lead to a deadlock. It is the case, however, that there is a situation in which the only possible behaviour allowed by these two rules is the passage of time. The check for timed deadlock freedom provides the following counterexample. First BвҒўaвҒўtвҒўtвҒўeвҒўrвҒўyвҒўCвҒўrвҒўiвҒўtвҒўiвҒўcвҒўaвҒўl happens, so that both rules are triggered. Afterwards, the measures pвҒўeвҒўrвҒўsвҒўoвҒўnвҒўNвҒўeвҒўaвҒўrвҒўbвҒўy and tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўe are read and the values provided are tвҒўrвҒўuвҒўe and 33. So, RuleC requires the robot to GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe and RuleD requires it to SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm instead. We do not have a deadlock, as time can pass in the absence of a deadline. It so happens, however, that RuleC forbids SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm and RuleD forbids GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe (because the two events are in the alphabets of both rules, and SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm is not mentioned in the relevant defeater of RuleC, while GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe is not mentioned in the relevant defeater of RuleD). So, neither event can happen.

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,cnVsZV9zdGFydAogIFJ1bGVDIHdoZW4gQmF0dGVyeUNyaXRpY2FsCiAgICAgICAgdGhlbiBDYW1lcmFTdGFydAogICAgICAgIHVubGVzcyBwZXJzb25OZWFyYnkgdGhlbiBHb0hvbWUKICAgICAgICB1bmxlc3MgdGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgPiAzNSB0aGVuIFNvdW5kQWxhcm0KCiAgUnVsZUQgd2hlbiBCYXR0ZXJ5Q3JpdGljYWwKICAgICAgICB0aGVuIENhbWVyYVN0YXJ0CiAgICAgICAgdW5sZXNzIHBlcnNvbk5lYXJieSB0aGVuIFNvdW5kQWxhcm0KICAgICAgICB1bmxlc3MgdGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgPiAzNSB0aGVuIEdvSG9tZQpydWxlX2VuZA==)

rule\_start

В В RuleCВ whenВ BatteryCritical

В В В В В В В В thenВ CameraStart

В В В В В В В В unlessВ personNearbyВ thenВ GoHome

В В В В В В В В unlessВ temperatureВ \>В 35В thenВ SoundAlarm

В В RuleDВ whenВ BatteryCritical

В В В В В В В В thenВ CameraStart

В В В В В В В В unlessВ personNearbyВ thenВ SoundAlarm

В В В В В В В В unlessВ temperatureВ \>В 35В thenВ GoHome

rule\_end

ListingВ 6: Conflicting rule for the firefighter UAV

If a pair of rules are not conflicting, but their alphabets overlap, then one of them may be redundant. We next consider how to check for redundancy.

### 5.2 Detection of superfluous rules

For a pair of rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ that have overlapping alphabets and are not conflicting, we define redundancy below, using tE to denote the trace obtained from t by removing all events that are not in the set E.

###### Definition 5.2.

For conflict-free rules рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ, we say рқ—ӢрқҹӨ is redundant with respect to рқ—ӢрқҹЈ if, and only if, for every trace t1 of рқ—Ӯрқ–ҪвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ), there is a trace of t2 of \[\[рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ\]\]рқ–ўрқ–Ҝ, such that, t1Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ)\=t2Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—ӢрқҹЈ,рқ—ӢрқҹӨ).

First of all, we observe that the traces of the process that characterises a rule identify the behaviours allowed by the rule. So, the smaller that set of traces, the more restrictive is that rule. In this context, however, the reading of measures is irrelevant, since, as already said, rules use measures just to obtain information that indicates how the events are to restricted. So, in DefinitionВ [5.2](#S5.Thmdefinition2 "Definition 5.2. вҖЈ 5.2 Detection of superfluous rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we characterise a rule rвҒў2 as redundant, with respect to another rule рқ—ӢрқҹЈ, by considering the traces t1ОұEвҒў(r1), where t1 is a trace of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and ОұEвҒў(r1) is the set of events of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ or, more precisely, the set of CSP events that represent the SLEEC events of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ. These traces characterise the restrictions of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ. Similarly, the traces t2ОұEвҒў(r1,r2) characterise the restrictions of рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ. If every behaviour allowed by рқ—ӢрқҹЈ is also allowed by рқ—ӢрқҹЈ and рқ—ӢрқҹӨ, then рқ—ӢрқҹӨ imposes no additional restrictions, and it is, therefore, redundant.

The mechanisation of this check is direct, since trace inclusion in CSP corresponds to refinement, and ignoring events can be captured using the hiding CSP operator ().

###### Example 5.3.

In Listing [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), Rule1 is weaker, as it does not have a deadline, and can be eliminated. This can be automatically checked using the FDR model checker via a trace refinement. Since the refinement holds, there is no counterexample, but a clear indication of the weaker rule between the two.

Normally, a rule рқ—ӢрқҹӨ should not be redundant with respect to another rule рқ—ӢрқҹЈ if рқ—ӢрқҹӨ involves events not referenced in рқ—ӢрқҹЈ. This is, however, not necessarily the case, since the responses that refer to the extra events may be unreachable. So, in general, it is worth checking every pair of non-conflicting rules with overlapping alphabets of events. It is also possible to check for unreachable responses. Next, however, we consider autonomous agent conformance to SLEEC rules.

Our experience with the case studies presented in this paper and with a number of other examples of autonomous agents, as well as discussions with SLEEC experts suggest that the number of SLEEC rules for an autonomous agent will not run into the hundreds:В it is more like tens, if that. Moreover, a single rule is unlikely to have a very long or very deep list of defeaters. So, although our checks require a pairwise analysis of the rules, we expect that the checks for conflicts and redundancy within a SLEEC specification for an autonomous agent will remain tractable. Importantly, as we avoid dealing with the whole set of rules in a single check, model checking is also likely to remain feasible. The treatment of more complex data types provided by measures, however, are likely to impose a challenge.

### 5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules

Figure 5: Sketch of RoboChart model for a simple firefighter UAV

Figure 6: Tool for editing and supporting reasoning about SLEEC rules

  

This section describes our method for checking a system under verification (SUV) against a SLEEC rule рқ—Ӣ by means of refinement in tock-CSP. To that end, we assume the existence of a tock-CSP model for the SUV. Such models can be generated automatically from other design models, or can be devised manually by system developers with CSP modelling expertise. Here, we consider examples where a RoboChartВ Robochart modelfor the agent is available and used as a basis to generate a tock-CSP model SвҒўUвҒўV automatically.

The notion of conformance рқ—ӢвҠ§TвҒўTSвҒўUвҒўV that we adopt is defined below. In words, it corresponds to traces refinement in tock-CSP, where the specification is defined in terms of the process \[\[рқ—Ӣ\]\]рқ–ұ that captures the semantics of рқ—Ӣ (cf.В TableВ [2](#S4.T2 "Table 2 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")). Traces refinement in tock-CSP ensures that the events of the SUV occur in the order and time specified, so that time budgets and deadlines are respected. Like in the check for redundancy, refinement disregards the measures; here, however, we require the values of the measures recorded in the specification and in the SUV to be the same. (In the definition of redundancy from SectionВ [5.2](#S5.SS2 "5.2 Detection of superfluous rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), this is ensured by the conjunction process.)

###### Definition 5.3.

An SUV conforms to a rule r, written рқ—ӢвҠ§TвҒўTSвҒўUвҒўV, where SвҒўUвҒўV is the tock-CSP model of SUV, if, and only if, for every trace t1 of the process SвҒўUвҒўV;SвҒўtвҒўoвҒўp, there is a trace t2 of \[\[рқ—Ӣ\]\]рқ–ұ such that: (1)В t1Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣ)\=t2Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣ) and; (2)В for every event e of Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣ) in a position i of these traces, for every measure m in Оұрқ–¬вҒў(рқ—Ӣ), the value of m recorded in t1 and t2 at position i are the same.

We consider the process SвҒўUвҒўV;SвҒўtвҒўoвҒўp, rather than just SвҒўUвҒўV, because the processes that give semantics to a rule do not terminate. If SUV terminates, subsequent composition with SвҒўtвҒўoвҒўp ensures that we do not erroneously flag a problem just because the rule does not allow termination.

According to DefinitionВ [5.3](#S5.Thmdefinition3 "Definition 5.3. вҖЈ 5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), a conforming SUV may engage in additional events and read additional measures. The value v of a measure m at i in a trace t is that in the last event m.v before the occurrence of the i\-th event of Оұрқ–ӨвҒў(рқ—Ӣ) in t. Conformance requires that, if a rule reads a measure, a conforming SUV must read that measure as well. Moreover, when checking conformance, we consider traces based on the same values for those measures.

As mentioned earlier, the mechanisation of conformance checking is based on refinement, but the specification is a weakening of \[\[рқ—Ӣ\]\]рқ–ұ, with respect to refinement, to allow occurrence of additional events and any order in the reading of measures.

We illustrate the verification process using a simplified model of the control software of the firefighting UAV. In the next section, we consider additional examples.

###### Example 5.4.

As said, for modelling we use RoboChart. In FigureВ [5](#S5.F5 "Figure 5 вҖЈ 5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we show a RoboChart interface Capabilities that declares those capabilities of the firefighter UAV that we identified in the SLEEC specification. Other interfaces in the model may declare additional capabilities not related to SLEEC concerns, but needed to implement the firefighter UAV mission. We also show a RoboChart state machine called UAV that specifies the control software of our simple firefighter in terms of these Capabilities and using local variablesВ (person, wind, and temp). In the initial state Init of UAVВ (the target of the transition out of the initial junction indicated by a dark circle with an i), an entry action reads the windSpeed, recording it in the local variable wind, and the temperature, recording it in temp. The notation вҖҳ<{0}вҖҷ specifies that these inputs need to be immediately available. There are two transitions out of Init. The first has the event BatteryCritical as a trigger. If this event happens, the UAV cannot proceed, and terminates by transitioning to the final state, indicated by a clear circle with an F. The other transition has no trigger, but a guard that requires the wind not to be strongВ (wind != windScale::strong, where windScale is the enumeration type of wind defined on the left in FigureВ [5](#S5.F5 "Figure 5 вҖЈ 5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")), and the temperature to be highВ (temp \> 35), indicating a possible fire. That transition leads to a composite state Recording whose entry action starts the camera. Its own state machine is concerned with whether there is a personNearby. Every 1s, this state machine reads that measure and records it in the variable person. Depending on whether there is such a person or not, it raises the event SoundAlarm. A transition out of Recording ensures that, when the BatteryCritical is signalled, the UAV goes back to base by raising the event GoHome. The guard ensures that the amount of time since the state Recording has been enteredВ (sinceEntry(Recording)) is greater than 0, so that the check for the presence of a person is carried out before returning.

There are several simplifications in this example, but our focus is on the rules in ListingВ [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). We have identified that Rule1 is redundant, so we do not need to be concerned with it. Our technique identifies that the model satisfies Rule2, but not Rule3. The counterexample provided by the FDR model checker has the following events:

wвҒўiвҒўnвҒўdвҒўSвҒўpвҒўeвҒўeвҒўd.lвҒўiвҒўgвҒўhвҒўt,tвҒўeвҒўmвҒўpвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўtвҒўuвҒўrвҒўeвҒў.36,CвҒўaвҒўmвҒўeвҒўrвҒўaвҒўSвҒўtвҒўaвҒўrвҒўt,pвҒўeвҒўrвҒўsвҒўoвҒўnвҒўNвҒўeвҒўaвҒўrвҒўbвҒўy.tвҒўrвҒўuвҒўe,tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўkвҒўSвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm,BвҒўaвҒўtвҒўtвҒўeвҒўrвҒўyвҒўCвҒўrвҒўiвҒўtвҒўiвҒўcвҒўaвҒўl,GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe

This counterexample is a trace that leads to a forbidden event, here GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe. The trace corresponds to a scenario in which, in the Init state, the measures windSpeed and temperature read are as lвҒўiвҒўgвҒўhвҒўt and 36, respectively. With that, in the state Recording, the camera is started, when there is a personNearby. So, after 1В sВ (i.e., one tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk), the alarm is sounded, but the battery is indicated as critical. In this situation the UAV goes home, but Rule3 forbids that for 5 minutes. Indeed, the projection of this UAV trace to the events of Rule3 is SвҒўoвҒўuвҒўnвҒўdвҒўAвҒўlвҒўaвҒўrвҒўm,GвҒўoвҒўHвҒўoвҒўmвҒўe, which is not a trace of the process for Rule3 (without the events that refer to measures). So, considering DefinitionВ [5.3](#S5.Thmdefinition3 "Definition 5.3. вҖЈ 5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), conditionВ (1) is not satisfied.

Before providing additional examples in the next section, we note that the relatively low complexity of SLEEC rules is expected to make the verification of SUV compliance with each individual rule feasibleвҖ”under the assumption that the SUV tock-CSP model is itself of manageable size. As is often the case with model checking, this assumption may not always hold because of state explosion, in particular as the FDR model checker is not optimised for dealing with timed (i.e., tock-CSP) models despite support them. On the positive side, RoboChart is part of a framework that includes support for alternative verification approaches, based on theorem proving, simulation, and testingВ CBBCFMRS21. In particular, theorem proving is promising, and amenable to automation if we use automatically generated semantics, like that of SLEEC.

## 6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional  
case study

In this section, we present our efforts to validate our work beyond the firefighter UAV case study presented as a running example in the previous sections. In SectionВ [6.1](#S6.SS1 "6.1 SLEEC tool вҖЈ 6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional case study вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"), we present a mechanisation of the semantics in SectionВ [4](#S4 "4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") to support editing of SLEEC rules and automatic generation of tock-CSP scripts. The close relationship between the definition of the semantics and its mechanisation provides validation for the work via evidence that there are enough definitions, and that they produce valid tock-CSP processes. SectionВ [6.2](#S6.SS2 "6.2 Robot Assistive Application вҖЈ 6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional case study вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") presents another case study, namely, an assistive dressing robot. The SLEEC rules for this example have been developed in collaboration with SLEEC experts, and we have used our tool to validate the rules. In addition, we have verified a design of that robot with respect to our rules.

### 6.1 SLEEC tool

We have implemented the SLEEC syntaxВ (Figure [1](#S3.F1 "Figure 1 вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")) in Eclipse with approximately 120В lines of XtextВ XText code. The translation of SLEEC documents to tock-CSP is based on the definitions presented in TablesВ [2](#S4.T2 "Table 2 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")вҖ“[4](#S4.T4 "Table 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") and is implemented in Xtend (approximately 700 lines of code)В XTend, a lightweight version of Java.

The implementation of рқ—Үрқ—Ҳрқ—Ӣрқ—ҶвҒў(рқ—Ҷрқ–Ўрқ–Ө) allows seconds, minutes, hours and days in the concrete syntax and it normalises each value to seconds in the current implementation. The resulting tool is described inВ YBJCC23. We tested a wide range of different rule structures from TablesВ В [2](#S4.T2 "Table 2 вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents")вҖ“[4](#S4.T4 "Table 4 вҖЈ 4.4 Responses вҖЈ 4 SLEEC Semantics вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") specified in our SLEEC language. All code and the models are publicly availableВ sleec.

For the semantics, we translate from the trace-based definitions of conflict, redundancy, and conformance, to refinement checks via a mechanisation of tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSPВ BaxterRC22 for verification using the CSP model-checker FDRВ FDR. This enables the automatic analysis of SLEEC rules and verification of conformance against system models with tвҒўoвҒўcвҒўk\-CSP semantics, such as in the case of RoboChart models.

FigureВ [6](#S5.F6 "Figure 6 вҖЈ 5.3 Verification of compliance with SLEEC rules вҖЈ 5 Validation and Verification вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") shows a screenshot of our tool, where we can see the encoding of the SLEEC definitions and rules from ListingsВ [1](#LST1 "Listing 1 вҖЈ 3.1 The definitions block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") and [2](#LST2 "Listing 2 вҖЈ 3.2 The rules block вҖЈ 3 The SLEEC Language вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") in the left pane, and the automatically generated tock-CSP script for the SLEEC specification in the right pane. We note that, because model checking operates with finite models, measures of the type IвҒўnвҒўt need to be specified using finite intervals such as {0..35}.

### 6.2 Robot Assistive Application

We present here our second case study, a robotic assistive dressingВ (RAD) system tasked with aiding a physically impaired user with dressing adapted from the solution presented inВ camilleri2022DCS. A secondary function of RAD is to monitor the health of the user, who is liable to fall. When falls are detected, RAD is expected to contact support services. Health and fall monitoring is achieved through a smart watch worn by the user and by visual sensors mounted on the platform and in the userвҖҷs home. To communicate with the user, RAD is equipped with voice recognition and speech modules. RAD can communicate with a support operator located off site by transmitting audio and video feeds. Finally, RAD can control temperature, lighting and the opening/closing of the room curtains through home automation functionality.

(a) DressingService state machine

(b) MonitoringService state machine

Figure 7: RoboChart state machines of the RAD application

RADвҖҷs control software is specified as a RoboChart model that includes multiple state machines defining parallel behaviour. The two state machines relevant to the discussion here are DressingService and MonitoringService; they are depicted in FigureВ [7](#S6.F7 "Figure 7 вҖЈ 6.2 Robot Assistive Application вҖЈ 6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional case study вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents"). DressingService specifies the software for dressing of users, and interacts with the platform via events such as DressingStarted and DressingAbandoned. MonitoringService mediates the opening of a roomвҖҷs curtains, and can call support if needed. In what follows, we describe each state machine in further detail.

In DressingService the state machine is initially in an Idle state. A transition to a Dressing state is triggered by the event DressingStarted, corresponding to a request from the user. In that stateвҖҷs entry action the current roomTemperature is input into a local variable temp, and then the behaviour is given by a call to an operation Dress with the current temperature passed as a parameter. Here, Dress is a software operation that captures the time the actual dressing can take, after which it sets the value of a Boolean variable completed to true. Because Dress is called in a during action, this behaviour can be interrupted by any of DressingвҖҷs outgoing transitions:В either because completed is true, or as a result of DressingAbandoned being triggered. In both cases, before Dressing is exited, its exit action is executed:В it calls an operation Clear that sets the variables completed and retry to false followed by an output on DressingComplete to indicate that dressing has completed, irrespective of whether it has succeeded. In Abandoned there is a call to an operation Retry. This operation captures a protocol for agreeing to retry dressing. If there is agreement from the user, then retry is set to true and the transition back to Dressing is enabled and taken. Otherwise, if no agreement has been reached and more than two minutes have elapsed since entering Abandoned, the guard over the transition to Idle becomes true. When that transition is taken there is a call to a software operation CallSupportDecision that calls support depending on whether there is user assent for that.

The machine MonitoringService also starts in an Idle state, from where two outgoing transitions that can be triggered by events UserFallen and CurtainOpenRqt. If a user has fallen then the operation CallSupportDecision is called, followed by the opening of curtains in the entry action of the state OpenCurtains, and then there is a transition back to Idle. If there is a request to open the curtains via CurtainOpenRqt, then there are two readings of measures userUnderDressed and userDistressed to determine if the user is under dressed and their level of distress. If the user is neither under dressed nor highly distressed, then the curtains are opened, and otherwise the request is refused as indicated by the output event refuseRequest.

Robotic assistive dressing raises multiple SLEEC concerns. We show in TableВ [6.2](#S6.SS2 "6.2 Robot Assistive Application вҖЈ 6 Evaluation: Tool support and additional case study вҖЈ Specification, Validation and Verification of Social, Legal, Ethical, Empathetic and Cultural Requirements for Autonomous Agents") four rules defined by experts; their motivation, in terms of SLEEC principles that should be followed and why, is indicated in the table.

Rule1 is concerned with the time taken by a dressing episode; at most 2В minutes to complete, unless the room temperature is low, in which case it should be faster. Rule2 regulates the opening of the curtains, which should consider the privacy of the user, but also be sensitive to the distress that can be caused if a user request for the curtains to be opened is denied. If a user fall is detected then support must to called, but Rule3 requires that assent from the user is available for this. Finally, if the dressing is abandoned, there should be an attempt to retry, and, eventually the support must be called. Again, however, as required by Rule4, the userвҖҷs assent should be gained beforehand.

Table 6: SLEEC rules for the RAD system

Rule id

SLEEC Specification

SLEEC  
principle

Implication

Rule1

[в¬Ү](data:text/plain;base64,d2hlbiBEcmVzc2luZ1N0YXJ0ZWQgdGhlbiBEcmVzc2luZ0NvbXBsZXRlCiAgICB3aXRoaW4gMiBtaW51dGVzCiAgICB1bmxlc3Mgcm9vbVRlbXBlcmF0dXJlIDwgMTkgdGhlbiBEcmVzc2luZ0NvbXBsZXRlCiAgICAgICAgd2l0aGluIDkwIHNlY29uZHMKICAgIHVubGVzcyByb29tVGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgPCAxNyB0aGVuIERyZXNzaW5nQ29tcGxldGUKICAgICAgICB3aXRoaW4gNjAgc2Vjb25kcw==)

whenВ DressingStartedВ thenВ DressingComplete

В В В В withinВ 2В minutes

В В В В unlessВ roomTemperatureВ <В 19В thenВ DressingComplete

В В В В В В В В withinВ 90В seconds

В В В В unlessВ roomTemperatureВ <В 17В thenВ DressingComplete

В В В В В В В В withinВ 60В seconds

empathetic  
ethical

promotes and supports user  
well-being

Rule2
