---
title: "AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"
arxiv_id: "2410.06153"
license: "CC-BY"
license_tier: "open"
redistributable: true
license_url: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"
date: "2024-10-08"
full_text: true
pdf_url: "https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.06153v3"
html_url: "https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153"
authors:
  - "Yu Shang"
  - "Yu Li"
  - "Keyu Zhao"
  - "Likai Ma"
  - "Jiahe Liu"
  - "Fengli Xu"
  - "Yong Li"
categories:
  - "cs.CL"
---

# AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space

 Yu Shang1111Equal contribution.     Yu Li2111Equal contribution.     Keyu Zhao1     Likai Ma1     Jiahe Liu1     Fengli Xu1222Corresponding author, correspondence to fenglixu@tsinghua.edu.cn, liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn.     Yong Li1222Corresponding author, correspondence to fenglixu@tsinghua.edu.cn, liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn.  
  
                          1Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University  
                          2Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University

###### Abstract

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to a rapid growth of agentic systems capable of handling a wide range of complex tasks. However, current research largely relies on manual, task-specific design, limiting their adaptability to novel tasks. In this paper, we introduce a new research problem: Modularized LLM Agent Search (MoLAS). We propose a modular design space that abstracts existing LLM agent designs into four fundamental modules with uniform IO interface: _Planning_, _Reasoning_, _Tool Use_, and _Memory_. Building on this design space, we present a novel LLM agent search framework called AgentSquare, which introduces two core mechanisms, _i.e._, _module evolution_ and _recombination_, to efficiently search for optimized LLM agents. To further accelerate the process, we design a performance predictor that uses in-context surrogate models to skip unpromising agent designs. Extensive experiments across six benchmarks, covering the diverse scenarios of web, embodied, tool use and game applications, show that AgentSquare substantially outperforms hand-crafted agents, achieving an average performance gain of 17.2% against best-known human designs. Moreover, AgentSquare can generate interpretable design insights, enabling a deeper understanding of agentic architecture and its impact on task performance. We believe that the modular design space and AgentSquare search framework offer a platform for fully exploiting the potential of prior successful designs and consolidate the collective efforts of research community. Code repo is available at https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/AgentSquare.

## 1 Introduction

The past few years have witnessed remarkable progress in the development of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib1); Touvron et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib31)), giving rise to the proliferation of numerous agentic systems (Weng, [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib40); Shen et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib26)). For example, “chain-of-thought” prompting has unlocked the general-purpose reasoning capabilities of LLMs (Wei et al., [2022](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib38)), and memory mechanisms have been proven effective in simulating human behavioiur (Park et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib20)). These emerging LLM agents have demonstrated astonishing abilities to transform a wide range of tasks, including solving mathematical problems (Romera-Paredes et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib22)), navigating the web (Nakano et al., [2021](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib18)), providing financial advice (Ding et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib5)) and informing medical decisions (Li et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib13)). Therefore, the design of agentic systems plays a crucial role in harnessing the power of LLMs for various downstream applications.

However, current research predominantly relies on manually designed agentic systems tailored for specific tasks, which often depend heavily on expert insight and intensive human labor. Furthermore, these task-specific agent designs frequently struggle to adapt to novel tasks. A few recent studies have explored using LLMs to rewrite and optimize the prompts of existing agents (Fernando et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib7); Yang et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib45)). A more recent work introduces the idea to leverage LLMs to search the entire agentic systems defined in code space (Hu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib10)), enabling the discovery of agents with more flexible prompts, control flows, etc. However, these previous approaches are limited in their ability to explicitly recombine the strengths of agentic modules discovered by different researches and located in separate codebases. Another line of research focuses on optimizing the configuration of multi-agent systems (Chen et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib4); Yuan et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib49); Li et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib15); Zhuge et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib53); Wang et al., [2023b](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib36)). These efforts are orthogonal to the optimization of single-agent systems, as they focus more on the role-playing and interaction patterns among multiple agents, rather than the design of agentic modules.

Figure 1: AgentSquare is a modular framework for designing and optimizing LLM agents.

This paper addresses a novel research problem — Modularized LLM Agent Search (MoLAS). The goal is to automatically optimize LLM agent designs by leveraging the experience of published or evaluated modules. Therefore, the core of our work is a modular design space for LLM agents, comprising 4 categories of modules: _Planning_, _Reasoning_, _Tool Use_, and _Memory_. This design space is abstracted from a thorough literature review of existing agentic systems (details provided in Section 2). It is important to note that our goal is not to propose the most comprehensive, one-size-fits-all LLM agent design space, but rather to demonstrate that our modular design space enables researchers and intelligent search algorithms to fully exploit the potential of prior successful designs. MoLAS is a guided and constrained searching problem in the modular design space, which is a subset of the entire code search proposed in ADAS (Hu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib10)). However, MoLAS has a nice feature of providing standardized IO interfaces for agent modules, facilitating easy recombination of modules from different agentic systems and hence enabling efficient search for novel agents. Our design space is also highly extensible, allowing new agentic systems to be integrated as plug-in modules. Therefore, it provides a platform to consolidate the collective efforts of the research community on LLM agents. The overview of this work is illustrated in Figure [1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S1.F1 "Figure 1 ‣ 1 Introduction ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space").

Building on this modular design space, we propose a novel LLM agent search framework called AgentSquare. Specifically, AgentSquare optimizes LLM agents through the mechanisms of _module evolution_ and _recombination_. The _module evolution_ mechanism leverages an evolutionary meta-prompt to explore new modules through prompt-level optimization, which jointly models task descriptions, existing modules, and the performance of evaluated modules. Besides, the _module recombination_ mechanism performs module-level optimization by leveraging the reasoning power of LLMs to strategically search for promising module combinations. To reduce the expensive evaluation costs of LLM agents, we further introduce a performance predictor that implements an in-context surrogate model for newly proposed LLM agents, enabling us to skip unpromising candidates and significantly accelerate the search process.

We conduct comprehensive evaluations on six widely adopted benchmarks, covering diverse use cases in web, embodied, tool use and game scenarios. Our experiments show AgentSqaure can discover novel LLM agents that outperform hand-crafted agents across all six benchmarks, scoring an average performance gain of 17.2% compared to the best known human designs. Besides, AgentSqaure also surpasses other search algorithms in terms of having a steeper optimization trajectory. More importantly, case studies reveal that AgentSquare can provide human interpretable design insights for newly discovered, good-performing agents.

The key contributions of this work are as follows:

*   •
    
    We propose a novel modular design space for LLM agents, enabling researchers to easily build on previous successful designs and accumulate new discoveries as a community.
    
*   •
    
    We design the AgentSquare framework that efficiently searches for novel and good-performing LLM agents via the novel mechanism of _module evolution_, _module recombination_, and _performance predictor_.
    
*   •
    
    Experiments across six diverse tasks show that our method discovers novel LLM agents that outperform all known human designs. Besides, AgentSqaure can generate human interpretable design insights for these novel agents.
    

## 2 A Modular Design Space of LLM Agents

Figure 2: Illustration of the modular agent design space and agentic workflow (left) and the standardized IO interface of four types of modules (right).

### 2.1 Background

Using LLMs for automatic optimization has been a widely explored topic, such as applications in code generation (Lehman et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib12); Romera-Paredes et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib22)) and neural architecture search (Nasir et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib19); Chen et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib2)). There are several recent studies that explore the problem of prompting LLMs to design LLM agentic systems. OPRO (Yang et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib45)) and Promptbreeder (Fernando et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib7)) can be viewed as leveraging the reasoning power of LLMs to improve the prompt of LLM agents. More importantly, ADAS introduces the idea of searching the entire agentic system defined in code space, and propose a Meta Agent Search algorithm that discovers LLM agents outperforming state-of-the-art human designs (Hu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib10)). Our main difference and contribution lie in introducing a modular design space for LLM agents, which can provide a standard framework to support the convenient reuse of existing successful agent components and fruitful innovative agent module discovery.

A modular design space for LLM agents facilitates the reuse of prior successful designs and supports the exploration of new architectures. At the core of such modularization is the standardization of input-output interfaces, which ensures both extensibility and seamless integration with existing designs. Many experts in the field have proposed building LLM agentic systems with key modular components from engineering (Weng, [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib40)) and cognitive perspectives (Sumers et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib30)). However, these proposals remain largely conceptual, lacking implementable solutions to unify existing LLM agents. Besides, current LLM workflow program frameworks (_e.g._, LangChain and AutoGPT) only provide operation-level components, which cannot support module-level search that best exploits the potential of prior successful designs.

To address these problems, we perform a comprehensive literature review of publications from NeurIPS, ICML, and ICLR over the past three years. The review focuses on papers with the keywords “LLM”, “Agent”, or “Large Language Model” in their titles while excluding works related to multi-agent systems or agents that require additional training. Note that our aim is not to propose the most comprehensive, one-for-all LLM agent design space, but to offer a standardized framework that enables the recombination of existing agents and facilitates the discovery of new ones. As a result, we sort out 16 popular LLM agents and abstract a modular design space with 1050 possible combinations, which can be easily extended when new modules are discovered. Below, we describe the agentic workflow and the function of four modules in our design space.

### 2.2 Workflow overview

The proposed agent workflow operates through an iterative process with the interconnection of the above four modules, as shown in Figure [2](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S2.F2 "Figure 2 ‣ 2 A Modular Design Space of LLM Agents ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). Upon receiving a task d, the agent starts with the _planning_ module, decomposing it into n sub-tasks{s1,s2,…,sn}. Next, these sub-tasks are passed to the _reasoning_ module sequentially. Taking the sub-task si description as input, the _reasoning_ module explores to prompt LLMs to give the result. When reasoning encounters limitations in internal knowledge of LLMs, the _tool use_ module is activated to select an appropriate tool from the pre-defined tool pool τ, supporting problem-solving. Besides, the reasoning process also accesses the _memory_ module which reads and writes necessary observations and experiences from a memory database m⁢e⁢m to help reasoning. The reasoning result of each sub-task will be transformed into actions, guiding the agent to interact with the external environment. After all sub-tasks are finished or the reasoning process gets stacked, the agent will activate the _planning_ module to adjust the plan with the received feedback. The agent conducts such a trial-and-error loop until the task d is completed or the set maximum trial number is reached.

Planning. The planning module is responsible for decomposing the targeted task into smaller sub-tasks. Given a task description d and optional feedback information f, the planning module P strategically decomposes the targeted task into a sub-task sequence {s1,s2,…,sn}\=P⁢(d,f). Such decomposition is critical for handling very complex tasks with long-term characteristics, especially for agents in open-world environments such as MineCraft (Wang et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib32); [c](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib37)).

Reasoning. LLMs have exhibited remarkable reasoning abilities under advanced prompting approaches such as CoT (Wei et al., [2022](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib38)), ToT (Yao et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib47)), and SoT (Shang et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib24)), shaping the foundation of the intelligence of LLM agents. The reasoning module R is invoked to solve the sub-tasks sequentially after planning, which takes each sub-task si and optional feedback information fi as input and outputs a solution ri\=R⁢(si,fi).

Tool use. The ability of using external tools (Shen et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib26); Schick et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib23)) overcomes the limitations of the LLM’s internal knowledge during the reasoning process. Formally, given certain problem pi⁢j derived from the reasoning process of sub-task si and a pre-defined tool pool τ, the tooluse module T selects the best-matched tool ti⁢j to address the problem, denoted as ti⁢j\=T⁢(pi⁢j,τ), where ti⁢j∈τ.

Memory. Memory plays a critical role by storing past thoughts, actions, and observations of agents (Park et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib20); Shinn et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib27)). During the reasoning process, these internal logs are dynamically written to and retrieved from the memory database m⁢e⁢m, controlled by the memory module M. The writing process can be expressed as m⁢e⁢m\=Mw⁢r⁢i⁢t⁢e⁢(o,m⁢e⁢m), where o denotes the current observations. The retrieval process is m\=Mr⁢e⁢t⁢r⁢i⁢e⁢v⁢e⁢(o,m⁢e⁢m), where m denotes the retrieved knowledge relevant to the current situation.

## 3 AgentSquare Framework

Figure 3: Overview of AgentSquare search framework. AgentSquare optimizes LLM agents through the mechanisms of module evolution and recombination. We further introduce a performance predictor that implements an in- context surrogate model for efficient evaluation of novel agents.

### 3.1 Problem formulation of MoLAS

In the proposed modular design space, an LLM agent A can be instantiated with the combination of a planning module P, a reasoning module R, a tooluse module T and a memory module M, denoted as A\=(P,R,T,M). Given the task description d and the set of all possible modules with standardized IO interface {ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄}. We formulate an optimization problem for searching LLM agent architectures within the modular design space. The objective is to identify the optimal module combination in a solution space defined by a Cartesian product of four design dimensions to maximize agent performance. Let the performance evaluation function of the task be E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(⋅), where the specific metric varies in different tasks as discussed in Appendix [A.1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.SS1 "A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). The optimization problem of MoLAS is defined as follows:

arg⁢maxP∈ℙ,R∈ℝ,T∈𝕋,M∈𝕄⁡E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(P,R,T,M).

(1)

### 3.2 AgentSquare search algorithm

Solving the optimization problem of MoLAS features three key challenges: (1) The search space, defined as the Cartesian product of four orthogonal modules, is vast and hard to explore; (2) the module sets encompass any code with standard IO interfaces, making the module selection an open-ended problem; (3) the high costs of agent evaluation during the search process constrain the overall search scale. To tackle these issues, we introduce AgentSquare, an automatic search framework to optimize LLM agents within the modular design space. Facing the vast search space of MoLAS, we propose _module recombination_ operation utilizing LLMs to strategically reason to identify more promising module combinations. Such operation broadens the coverage of child samples, overcoming the limitations of prompt rewrite methods that explore only a restricted space. However, only searching in the existing module combinations also narrows the search space, thus we propose _module evolution_ operation which employs an evolutionary meta-prompt to search new modules through code-level optimization. This operation, combined with module recombination, enables the search of any module combination in the open-ended solution space. Finally, to mitigate the high costs of frequent evaluations of searched agents, we design a _performance predictor_ as an in-context surrogate model for evaluating searched agents, significantly accelerating the search process and reducing real-valued costs.

The overall framework of AgentSquare is illustrated in Figure [3](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S3.F3 "Figure 3 ‣ 3 AgentSquare Framework ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") and the algorithm is presented in Algorithm [1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#algorithm1 "In A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). Next, we detail the key components of the AgentSquare search process.

### 3.3 Initialization

Insights from existing AutoML studies indicate that a well-chosen initialization enhances warm-up and improves search efficiency by avoiding unpromising populations (So et al., [2019](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib29); Yuan et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib49)). AgentSquare starts by initializing a global experience pool 𝔼\={(P,R,T,M,v)|P0∈ℙ,R0∈ℝ,T0∈𝕋,M0∈𝕄} to seed agents that are well-designed (as mentioned in Section 2) along with their real-valued performance v. The module pools {ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄} are set to the standardized modules extracted from these seed agents.

### 3.4 Module Recombination

Given the vast solution space of MoLAS, relying solely on prompt rewriting leads to a limited exploration confined to the neighbor of the initial state. To expand the exploration space, we propose leveraging LLMs as a _self-adaptive proposer_, which iteratively reason to identify promising module combinations with accumulated experience beyond the original agent configuration. Denote the initial agent of the recombination phase as Ar0\=(P0,R0,T0,M0), where P0∈ℙ,R0∈ℝ,T0∈𝕋,M0∈𝕄. The module combination proposer LLM πθ incorporates targeted task description d, existing module pools {ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄} and the performance experience of searched module combinations 𝔼 to propose promising new agents Ar:

Ar\=πθ⁢((P0,R0,T0,M0),d,N,ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄,𝔼).

(2)

Based on the initial agent configuration Ar0, the LLM proposes N offspring {Ar1,Ar2,…,ArN} by replacing certain modules of Ar0 with alternatives from the module pool. For instance, a possible solution could be (P0,R′,T0,M0), where R′∈ℝ is a different reasoning module selected from the module pool. Then, the created N new agents are evaluated with a performance predictor πp (detail in Seciton [3.6](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S3.SS6 "3.6 Performance Predictor ‣ 3 AgentSquare Framework ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space")) and the best one goes to the next episode as initialization.

### 3.5 Module Evolution

As mentioned above, the solution space for each module type is open-ended, allowing any code with a standardized I/O interface. Consequently, searching only with module recombination narrows the solution space and limits the upper bound of agent performance. To address this problem, we design a _module evolution_ operation with an evolutionary meta-prompt to search for new modules through program-level optimization. This design is inspired by the iterative pipeline of FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib22)), which prompts LLMs to propose new solutions based on the target problem and performance feedback from existing solutions. Building on this concept, we introduce a module-programming LLM πξ to conduct agent search in our modular design space by jointly modeling task descriptions, existing modules, and the performance of previously evaluated modules. Please note we reuse parts of the open-source code from ADAS (Hu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib10)) to implement the optimization procedure. Leveraging LLMs to search in the modular agent design space has several appealing advantages. Compared with the unconstrained design space of LLM agents, searching functional modules can produce a more focused and fruitful search space. Additionally, integrating existing successful module designs with standard IO as in-context examples can better elicit the reflective reasoning abilities of LLMs to identify previous key designs to help propose innovative ones. Denote the initial agent in the module evolution stage as Ae0\=(P0′,R0′,T0′,M0′), the module programmer LLM produces a population of child agents by evolving current modules of Ae0. Formally the module evolution operation is denoted as follows:

Ae\=πξ⁢((P0′,R0′,T0′,M0′),d,N,ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄,𝔼).

(3)

The created new modules are appended to the standardized module pools {ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄} and each module is used to individually mutate the initial agent, resulting in N child agents {Ae1,Ae2,…,AeN}. For example, (P∗,R0,T0,M0) represents a solution where the planning module is mutated into a new variant P∗. These child agents are then real-tested and updated to the historical experience pool 𝔼. The best-performing one is selected as the initial agent for the subsequent recombination phase.

### 3.6 Performance Predictor

The last challenge in automatic agent search is the high API cost incurred during the evaluation of each candidate agent. Many agent tasks require multiple steps and involve substantial input and output tokens, leading to prohibitive evaluation costs. For instance, evaluating a simple CoT agent based on GPT-4o in ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., [2021](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib28)) requires around $60, making the agent search economically unsustainable at scale. To tackle this issue, we propose incorporating an additional LLM πp as a performance predictor to serve as an in-context surrogate model for novel agent evaluation, enabling the exclusion of unpromising candidates and significantly accelerating the search process. Compared to real environment evaluation, such an in-context surrogate model requires significantly fewer tokens, making it more cost-efficient and supporting larger-scale searches. Similar approaches have been effectively applied in neural architecture search (NAS), where LLMs are leveraged to evaluate the performance of generated network architectures  (Jawahar et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib11); Chen et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib2)).

During the search process, newly created agents from module evolution are still tested in the real task environment because these new modules never appear in the experience pool, and it is unsuitable to use the performance predictor to provide predictions. During the module recombination operation, the newly proposed agents are evaluated by the performance predictor, which leverages in-context reasoning based on past agent combination performance to provide efficient performance prediction. Here, given a newly searched agent A′, the performance predictor πp thoroughly considers task descriptions d, module profiles and in-context performance examples of previously tested agents 𝔼 to score novel agents:

v′\=πp⁢(A′,d,ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄,𝔼),

(4)

where v′ is the predicted performance of the evaluated agent. Empirical results demonstrate that the predicted performance of agents closely matches their actual performance, verifying the effectiveness of the proposed performance predictor, which is detailed in Section [4.3](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.SS3 "4.3 Ablation Study of AgentSquare ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space").

## 4 Experiments

### 4.1 Experimental Setup

Task setup. We conduct experiments on six representative tasks covering four domains: embodied, game, web and tool applications, which are widely adopted by existing LLM agent benchmarks (Ma et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib16); Xi et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib42)), more details are presented in Appendix [A.1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.SS1 "A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space").

Baselines. We compare AgentSquare with four types of baselines including hand-crafted agents, module-level search, prompt-level search and agent-search methods. More details are presented in Appendix [A.1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.SS1 "A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space").

AgentSquare setup. We implement AgentSquare and conduct experiments using both GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 and GPT-4o (Achiam et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib1)). To ensure a fair comparison, we use the same number of few-shot examples across all methods. The initial agent is set as a random module combination, and the search process terminates after 5 consecutive iterations without performance improvement.

Web

Embodied

Tool

Game

Baseline Type

Method

Webshop

ALFWorld

SciWorld

M3Tool

Travel

PDDL

Hand-crafted Agents

CoT

0.485

0.405

0.697

0.448

0.487

0.542

Cot-SC

0.512

0.426

0.656

0.461

0.413

0.495

Self-refine

0.461

0.567

0.654

0.442

0.000

0.514

ToT

0.501

0.437

0.741

0.453

0.380

0.476

Step Back

0.468

0.279

0.220

0.434

0.000

0.486

TP

0.398

0.404

0.576

0.387

0.430

0.518

HuggingGPT

0.519

0.481

0.680

0.354

0.510

0.584

Voyager

0.366

0.425

0.776

0.247

0.523

0.412

Generative Agents

0.499

0.477

0.663

0.402

0.480

0.553

DEPS

0.481

0.459

0.740

0.278

0.540

0.591

OPENAGI

0.506

0.510

0.718

0.322

0.533

0.616

Dilu

0.451

0.433

0.682

0.475

0.360

0.463

Module Search

Random

0.533

0.620

0.704

0.438

0.563

0.660

Bayesian

0.549

0.634

0.749

0.502

0.537

0.650

Prompt Search

OPRO

0.505

0.380

0.569

0.309

0.523

0.589

Agent Search

ADAS

0.521

0.543

0.754

0.475

0.373

0.568

AgentSquare

0.607

0.695

0.781

0.524

0.583

0.669

Table 1: Performance comparison of searched agents from AgentSquare and (1) existing human-designed agents (2) module search baselines (3) prompt search baselines (4) agent search baselines based on GPT-4o on six tasks across different domains.

### 4.2 Experimental Results

Main results. We conduct extensive experiments to compare our method against three types of baselines on six tasks and present results based on GPT-4o in Table [1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.T1 "Table 1 ‣ 4.1 Experimental Setup ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") and results on GPT-3.5 in Table [A.3](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.T3 "Table A.3 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). Additionally, we evaluate the agents’ API costs and provide a performance-cost comparison in Figure [A.7](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F7 "Figure A.7 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") to Figure [A.12](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F12 "Figure A.12 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). From these results, we have the following observations:

*   •
    
    AgentSquare can effectively discover better agents compared with human-designed agents. On the six representative agent tasks, the best agent searched by AgentSquare consistently outperforms human-designed agents in terms of performance. Specifically, as shown in Table [1](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.T1 "Table 1 ‣ 4.1 Experimental Setup ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") and Table [A.3](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.T3 "Table A.3 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"), compared with the best human-designed agent, AgentSquare achieves an average 14.1% performance improvement on Webshop, 26.1% improvement on ALFWorld, 20.5% improvement on SciWorld, 30.6% improvement on M3Tool, 6.0% improvement on Travelplanner, 6.0% improvement on PDDL. Simultaneously, the best agent from AgentSquare is commonly cost-efficient, which strikes the best performance-cost trade-off among all compared agents as seen in Figure [A.7](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F7 "Figure A.7 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") -Figure [A.12](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F12 "Figure A.12 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). Since the search cost is a one-time expense and the searched modules can be reused, it is not included in the above analysis, but separately listed in Table [A.6](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.T6 "Table A.6 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space").
    
*   •
    
    AgentSquare provides a more efficient searching approach for LLM agent optimization. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the search of AgentSquare, we compare three types of searching methods including module search, prompt search and agent search. Compared with the best agent crafted from these searching methods, AgentSquare achieves an average 8.4% performance improvement on Webshop, 8.1% improvement on ALFWorld, 11.0% improvement on SciWorld, 12.8% improvement on M3Tool, 2.5% improvement on Travelplanner, 1.4% improvement on PDDL. The comparison of search-based methods is conducted with a fixed LLM token budget to ensure fairness by maintaining the same number of search iterations. While in principle ADAS has the potential to discover more sophisticated agents by searching in the entire code space, it may require more iterations (and thus higher LLM token usage) to achieve this.
    

Search trajectory in AgentSquare. We present the search trajectory under 15 iterations using AgentSquare based on GPT-4o and other searching methods on ALFWorld and Webhop tasks in Figure [4](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.F4 "Figure 4 ‣ 4.2 Experimental Results ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). Results on other tasks are presented in Figure [A.13](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F13 "Figure A.13 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") and [A.14](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F14 "Figure A.14 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). AgentSquare demonstrates a steady convergence trajectory, where more advanced agents are continually emerging during search. In contrast, module-level searching methods including random and Bayesian search lack a clear and insightful search direction. Prompt-level search methods such as OPRO are constrained by a limited modification space, leading to minimal performance improvements. As a result, they all encounter performance bottlenecks during the search process, resulting in sub-optimal agent architectures. Besides, we find that simple module-level search methods such as random recombination greatly outperforms prompt-level search, indicating the importance of searching in the modular design space.

Figure 4: AgentSquare search trajectory on Alfworld and Webshop.

Method

Webshop

ALFWorld

SciWorld

M3Tool

TravelPlanner

PDDL

AgentSquare (full)

0.607

0.695

0.781

0.524

0.583

0.669

w/o module evolution

0.564

0.649

0.736

0.502

0.577

0.614

w/o module recombination

0.560

0.616

0.710

0.481

0.280

0.669

Table 2: Ablation study of AgentSquare on GPT-4o on six tasks across different domains.

### 4.3 Ablation Study of AgentSquare

Effectiveness of module evolution and recombination. There are two key operations in the searching framework of AgentSquare: module evolution which creates new modules and module recombination which strategically recombines existing ones. To verify the effectiveness of each design, we tested three variants: the full model, a version without module evolution, and a version without module recombination. The results based on GPT-4o and GPT-3.5 are presented in Table [2](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.T2 "Table 2 ‣ 4.2 Experimental Results ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") and Table [A.5](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.T5 "Table A.5 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"), respectively. It can be seen that dropping each design results in a noticeable performance decline and the module recombination has a larger impact. Module recombination significantly expands the search space, reducing the risk of falling into a local optima. Meanwhile, module evolution facilitates the discovery of more advanced modules tailored to specific tasks. These two operations collaborate well ensuring the effectiveness of the search process in AgentSquare.

Figure 5: Validation of the effectiveness of the performance predictor (correlation between the actual and predicted performance) on each task.

Effectiveness of performance predictor. In this part, we verify the effectiveness of this design empirically. Figure [5](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.F5 "Figure 5 ‣ 4.3 Ablation Study of AgentSquare ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") illustrates the predicted performance of given agents versus their actual tested performance based on both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o on all six tasks. The tested agents were generated through random sampling by randomly combining existing modules. It can be found that the predicted performance closely aligns with the actual performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of the performance predictor. For instance, the evaluation cost of the predictor is only about 0.025% of the cost of a full evaluation based on GPT-4o in ALFWorld, demonstrating its remarkable cost-efficiency. We provide more experiment results of predicting the performance of the dynamically searched agents in Figure [A.15](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F15 "Figure A.15 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") of the Appendix.

### 4.4 Discovered Best Agents from AgentSquare

In this section, we provide some illustrations of the searched best agents, especially some discovered promising modules. Table [A.4](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.T4 "Table A.4 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") summarizes the searched best agent from AgentSquare and the best hand-crafted agents on all tasks. We can observe that AgentSquare can adaptively identify promising agents with both previously existing and newly programmed modules tailored to the given task. For instance, the discovered best agent for ALFWorld combines an existing well-designed memory module from Generative Agents with newly created planning (named TD) and reasoning modules (named SF-ToT). By comparison, the best hand-crafted agent Self-refine focuses only on reasoning module design while overlooking other functional modules, leading to suboptimal performance. Moreover, we illustrate two new modules and the human interpretable design insights discovered on ALFWorld in Figure [6](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#S4.F6 "Figure 6 ‣ 4.4 Discovered Best Agents from AgentSquare ‣ 4 Experiments ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space"). More illustrations are listed in the Figure [A.16](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F16 "Figure A.16 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space") to Figure [A.21](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#A1.F21 "Figure A.21 ‣ A.1 Experimental Setup ‣ Appendix A Appendix ‣ AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space").

Figure 6: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on ALFWorld.

## 5 Related Work

### 5.1 LLM-based Autonomous Agents

LLM-based autonomous agents are an advanced AI system using a core LLM to manage external functional modules and interact with the world (Ding et al., [2024b](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib6)). Recent studies have equipped LLM agents with several LLM-centric functional modules including planning (Hao et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib9); Zeng et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib50); Shao et al., [2025](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib25)), reasoning (Wei et al., [2022](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib38); Yao et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib47); Shang et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib24); Xu et al., [2025](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib44)), using tools (Shen et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib26); Schick et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib23)), and monitoring memory (Wang et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib32); Park et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib20)), greatly enhancing the capabilities of LLM agents. Along with the improvement of the single agent, there’s another line of work trying to build more advanced multi-agent systems by strategically organizing individual agents for both simulation (Li et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib15); Chen et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib4)) and targeted task solving (Qian et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib21); Chen et al., [2024b](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib3); Li et al., [2024b](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib14)). The emergence of more and more sophisticated agent produces remarkable performance improvement, however, their architectures and codebases differ greatly with each other. The lack of a unified design space and consistent terminologies across individual works makes it hard to compare different agents, understand their evolution routes, and guide new agent design directions.

### 5.2 Automatic Design of LLM-based Agents

LLM-based agent system, as the most advanced AI system, has not yet formed a unified design space and an automatic design approach. Engineering-oriented open resources like LangChain\*\*\*https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain and BabyAGI†††https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi have provided convenient ways to build an LLM-centric agentic system, however, they still need human participation to organize different modules and can’t support the optimization of the designed agent. Besides, there have been some conceptual frameworks trying to provide a unified design principle of LLM agents, such as CoALA (Sumers et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib30)). However, it’s still a vision of how LLM agents should be in the future, without providing a practical design framework. More importantly, there are several recent works that explore the problem of automating (at least part of) the design of LLM agent systems defined on different search spaces. OPRO (Yang et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib45)) and Promptbreeder (Fernando et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib7)) can be considered as using LLMs to optimize LLM agent defined on prompt space. More relevantly, ADAS (Hu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib10)) proposes to search the entire agentic system defined on code space, enabling the search for LLM agents with more flexible prompts, tool uses, control flows and more.

## 6 Conclusion

In this work, we introduce a novel modular design space for LLM agents, allowing researchers to build upon successful prior designs and collectively accumulate new insights. Based on this, we propose a novel research problem, Modularized LLM Agent Search (MoLAS), which aims to automatically optimize LLM agent designs by leveraging the knowledge gained from previously published or evaluated modules. To address the challenge of vast search spaces, we present AgentSquare, an automatic search framework to optimize LLM agents through module evolution and recombination. We further introduce a performance predictor as an in-context surrogate model for evaluating novel LLM agents to accelerate the search process. Overall, our work offers a transition from studying individual LLM agent designs to studying LLM agents within a modular design space, further consolidating the collective efforts of the research community.

## References

*   Achiam et al. (2023) Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774_, 2023.
*   Chen et al. (2024a) Angelica Chen, David Dohan, and David So. Evoprompting: language models for code-level neural architecture search. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024a.
*   Chen et al. (2024b) Lin Chen, Fengli Xu, Nian Li, Zhenyu Han, Meng Wang, Yong Li, and Pan Hui. Large language model-driven meta-structure discovery in heterogeneous information network. In _Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining_, pp.  307–318, 2024b.
*   Chen et al. (2023) Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu, Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent behaviors. In _The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2023.
*   Ding et al. (2024a) Han Ding, Yinheng Li, Junhao Wang, and Hang Chen. Large language model agent in financial trading: A survey. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06361_, 2024a.
*   Ding et al. (2024b) Jingtao Ding, Yunke Zhang, Yu Shang, Yuheng Zhang, Zefang Zong, Jie Feng, Yuan Yuan, Hongyuan Su, Nian Li, Nicholas Sukiennik, et al. Understanding world or predicting future? a comprehensive survey of world models. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14499_, 2024b.
*   Fernando et al. (2024) Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Sunil Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel. Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. In _Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning_, 2024.
*   Ge et al. (2024) Yingqiang Ge, Wenyue Hua, Kai Mei, Juntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Zelong Li, Yongfeng Zhang, et al. Openagi: When llm meets domain experts. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024.
*   Hao et al. (2023) Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. In _Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing_, pp.  8154–8173, 2023.
*   Hu et al. (2024) Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435_, 2024.
*   Jawahar et al. (2023) Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Laks VS Lakshmanan, and Dujian Ding. Llm performance predictors are good initializers for architecture search. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16712_, 2023.
*   Lehman et al. (2023) Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O Stanley. Evolution through large models. In _Handbook of Evolutionary Machine Learning_, pp.  331–366. Springer, 2023.
*   Li et al. (2024a) Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang Liu. Agent hospital: A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable medical agents. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02957_, 2024a.
*   Li et al. (2024b) Songwei Li, Jie Feng, Jiawei Chi, Xinyuan Hu, Xiaomeng Zhao, and Fengli Xu. Limp: Large language model enhanced intent-aware mobility prediction. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12832_, 2024b.
*   Li et al. (2023) Yuan Li, Yixuan Zhang, and Lichao Sun. Metaagents: Simulating interactions of human behaviors for llm-based task-oriented coordination via collaborative generative agents. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06500_, 2023.
*   Ma et al. (2024) Chang Ma, Junlei Zhang, Zhihao Zhu, Cheng Yang, Yujiu Yang, Yaohui Jin, Zhenzhong Lan, Lingpeng Kong, and Junxian He. Agentboard: An analytical evaluation board of multi-turn llm agents. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13178_, 2024.
*   Madaan et al. (2024) Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024.
*   Nakano et al. (2021) Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332_, 2021.
*   Nasir et al. (2024) Muhammad Umair Nasir, Sam Earle, Julian Togelius, Steven James, and Christopher Cleghorn. Llmatic: Neural architecture search via large language models and quality diversity optimization. In _Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference_, pp.  1110–1118, 2024.
*   Park et al. (2023) Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In _Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology_, pp.  1–22, 2023.
*   Qian et al. (2024) Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In _Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)_, pp.  15174–15186, 2024.
*   Romera-Paredes et al. (2024) Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. _Nature_, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
*   Schick et al. (2024) Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024.
*   Shang et al. (2024) Yu Shang, Yu Li, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. Defint: A default-interventionist framework for efficient reasoning with hybrid large language models. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02563_, 2024.
*   Shao et al. (2025) Chenyang Shao, Xinyuan Hu, Yutang Lin, and Fengli Xu. Division-of-thoughts: Harnessing hybrid language model synergy for efficient on-device agents. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04392_, 2025.
*   Shen et al. (2024) Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024.
*   Shinn et al. (2024) Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024.
*   Shridhar et al. (2021) Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In _International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2021.
*   So et al. (2019) David So, Quoc Le, and Chen Liang. The evolved transformer. In _International conference on machine learning_, pp.  5877–5886. PMLR, 2019.
*   Sumers et al. (2023) Theodore R Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L Griffiths. Cognitive architectures for language agents. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02427_, 2023.
*   Touvron et al. (2023) Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971_, 2023.
*   Wang et al. (2024a) Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. _Transactions on Machine Learning Research_, 2024a. ISSN 2835-8856.
*   Wang et al. (2022) Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In _Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing_, pp.  11279–11298, 2022.
*   Wang et al. (2024b) Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Executable code actions elicit better llm agents. In _Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning_, 2024b.
*   Wang et al. (2023a) Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In _The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2023a.
*   Wang et al. (2023b) Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing the emergent cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-collaboration. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300_, 2023b.
*   Wang et al. (2024c) Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Shawn Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and select: interactive planning with llms enables open-world multi-task agents. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024c.
*   Wei et al. (2022) Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. _Advances in neural information processing systems_, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
*   Wen et al. (2024) Licheng Wen, Daocheng Fu, Xin Li, Xinyu Cai, Tao MA, Pinlong Cai, Min Dou, Botian Shi, Liang He, and Yu Qiao. Dilu: A knowledge-driven approach to autonomous driving with large language models. In _The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2024.
*   Weng (2023) Lilian Weng. Llm-powered autonomous agents. _lilianweng.github.io_, Jun 2023. URL [https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/](https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/).
*   White et al. (2021) Colin White, Willie Neiswanger, and Yash Savani. Bananas: Bayesian optimization with neural architectures for neural architecture search. In _Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence_, volume 35, pp.  10293–10301, 2021.
*   Xi et al. (2024) Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Dingwen Yang, Chenyang Liao, Xin Guo, Wei He, et al. Agentgym: Evolving large language model-based agents across diverse environments. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04151_, 2024.
*   Xie et al. (2024) Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao, and Yu Su. Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents. In _Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning_, 2024.
*   Xu et al. (2025) Fengli Xu, Qianyue Hao, Zefang Zong, Jingwei Wang, Yunke Zhang, Jingyi Wang, Xiaochong Lan, Jiahui Gong, Tianjian Ouyang, Fanjin Meng, et al. Towards large reasoning models: A survey of reinforced reasoning with large language models. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09686_, 2025.
*   Yang et al. (2024) Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In _The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2024.
*   Yao et al. (2022) Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 35:20744–20757, 2022.
*   Yao et al. (2024) Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_, 36, 2024.
*   Yu et al. (2024) Junchi Yu, Ran He, and Zhitao Ying. THOUGHT PROPAGATION: AN ANALOGICAL APPROACH TO COMPLEX REASONING WITH LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS. In _The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2024.
*   Yuan et al. (2024) Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and Deqing Yang. Evoagent: Towards automatic multi-agent generation via evolutionary algorithms. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14228_, 2024.
*   Zeng et al. (2024) Qingbin Zeng, Qinglong Yang, Shunan Dong, Heming Du, Liang Zheng, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. Perceive, reflect, and plan: Designing llm agent for goal-directed city navigation without instructions. _arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04168_, 2024.
*   Zheng et al. (2024) Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models. In _The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations_, 2024.
*   Zhou et al. (2019) Hongpeng Zhou, Minghao Yang, Jun Wang, and Wei Pan. Bayesnas: A bayesian approach for neural architecture search. In _International conference on machine learning_, pp.  7603–7613, 2019.
*   Zhuge et al. (2024) Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Gptswarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In _Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning_, 2024.

## Appendix A Appendix

### A.1 Experimental Setup

Task setup. We evaluate AgentSquare and compared methods on six representative tasks covering four key domains which are widely adopted by existing LLM agent benchmarks (Ma et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib16); Xi et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib42)):

*   •
    
    Embodied: ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., [2021](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib28)) with text-based household tasks where agents navigate and interact with objects using text commands, ScienceWorld (Wang et al., [2022](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib33)) with interactive science tasks requiring agents to navigate rooms and perform experiments, testing scientific commonsense;
    
*   •
    
    Game: PDDL (Ma et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib16)) including many strategic games where agents use PDDL expressions to complete tasks;
    
*   •
    
    Web: WebShop (Yao et al., [2022](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib46)) focusing on online shopping tasks where agents browse and purchase products based on user instructions;
    
*   •
    
    Tool: TravelPlanner (Xie et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib43)) with many travel planning tasks where agents use tools and data to create detailed plans, (6)M3ToolEval (Wang et al., [2024b](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib34)) including complex tasks requiring multi-turn interactions with multiple tools.
    

The specific performance evaluation metric varies in different tasks, following the evaluation settings in their original work. Specifically, the evaluation metric is “success rate” for ALFWorld and M3ToolEval, “task score (defined as the average reward obtained across episodes)” for Webshop, “progress rate” for SciWorld and PDDL, and “micro pass rate” for TravelPlanner.

Baselines. We compare AgentSquare with four types of baselines:

*   •
    
    Hand-crafted agents. We compare with 12 hand-crafted agents including CoT (Wei et al., [2022](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib38)), CoT-SC (Wang et al., [2023a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib35)), Self-refine (Madaan et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib17)), ToT (Yao et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib47)), Step back (Zheng et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib51)), Thought propagation (Yu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib48)), HuggingGPT (Shen et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib26)), Voyager (Wang et al., [2024a](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib32)), Generative Agents (Park et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib20)), DEPS (Wang et al., [2024c](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib37)), OPENAGI (Ge et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib8))and Dilu (Wen et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib39)).
    
*   •
    
    Module search methods. We compare with two module-level agent optimization methods including the random combination of existing modules and Bayesian (Zhou et al., [2019](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib52)) module combination optimization inspired by Bayesian optimization in NAS (White et al., [2021](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib41)).
    
*   •
    
    Prompt search methods. We select OPRO (Yang et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib45)) as a representative prompt-level optimization approach, which leverages LLMs as optimizers by generating and refining instructions through iterative prompts.
    
*   •
    
    Agent search methods. We select ADAS (Hu et al., [2024](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib10)) which optimizes the entire agentic system in code space as the agent search baseline. We use the official code of ADAS and make slight modifications to adapt it to our tasks.
    

AgentSquare setup. We implement AgentSquare and conduct experiments using both GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 and GPT-4o (Achiam et al., [2023](https://arxiv.org/html/2410.06153v3#bib.bib1)). To ensure a fair comparison, we use the same number of few-shot examples across all methods. The initial agent is set as a random module combination, and the search process terminates after 5 consecutive iterations without performance improvement.

Input: Initial agent A0, targeted task descriptions d, maximum evolution episode K, population size N per evolution phase, standardized module pools {ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄}, experience pool 𝔼

Output: The evolved agent A∗

t←1 // Current search episode

Ae0←A0 // Initialization of the module evolution phase

while _t≤K_ do

       {Ae1,Ae2,…,AeN}←πξ⁢(Ae0,d,N,ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄,𝔼) // Module evolution

       Ar0←arg⁢max⁡{E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(Ae0),E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(Ae1),…,E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(AeN)} // Select the best-performing generated agent

       {Ar1,Ar2,…,ArN}←πθ⁢(Ar0,d,N,ℙ,ℝ,𝕋,𝕄,𝔼) // Module recombination

       Ae0←arg⁢max⁡{E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(Ar0),E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(Ar1),…,E⁢v⁢a⁢ld⁢(ArN)} // Select the best-performing generated agent

       t←t+1

A∗←Ae0

return A∗

Algorithm 1 Algorithm of AgentSquare

Web

Embodied

Tool

Game

Method Type

Method

Webshop

ALFWorld

SciWorld

M3Tool

Travel

PDDL

Hand-crafted Agents

CoT

0.504

0.369

0.142

0.172

0.080

0.151

CoT-SC

0.527

0.381

0.105

0.181

0.167

0.178

Self-refine

0.439

0.388

0.222

0.098

0.000

0.109

ToT

0.510

0.381

0.143

0.189

0.163

0.147

Step Back

0.478

0.375

0.027

0.128

0.120

0.137

TP

0.429

0.299

0.168

0.139

0.063

0.122

HuggingGPT

0.518

0.502

0.270

0.012

0.470

0.212

Voyager

0.427

0.369

0.301

0.008

0.480

0.149

Generative Agents

0.539

0.388

0.153

0.144

0.060

0.123

DEPS

0.555

0.474

0.308

0.017

0.500

0.186

OPENAGI

0.507

0.448

0.257

0.008

0.430

0.178

Dilu

0.418

0.291

0.000

0.131

0.137

0.054

Module Search

Random

0.562

0.569

0.367

0.235

0.473

0.216

Bayesian

0.581

0.611

0.269

0.217

0.497

0.210

Prompt Search

OPRO

0.507

0.376

0.032

0.193

0.513

0.179

Agent Search

ADAS

0.519

0.274

0.217

0.193

0.410

0.186

AgentSquare

0.617

0.651

0.432

0.285

0.520

0.219

Table A.3: Performance comparison of searched agents from AgentSquare and (1) existing human-designed agents (2) module search baselines (3) prompt search baselines based on GPT-3.5 on six tasks across different domains.

Task

Planning

Reasoning

Tooluse

Memory

Best Hand-crafted Agents

Webshop

IO

HTSS

/

Dilu

HuggingGPT

ALFWorld

TD

SF-ToT

/

Generative Agents

Self-refine

SciWorld

Voyager

CoT

/

Hier

Voyager

M3Tool

/

CoT-SC

ToolBF

/

Toolbench

TravelPlanner

DEPS

CoT

TH

/

DEPS

PDDL

IR

CASRC

/

Generative Agents

OPENAGI

Table A.4: Comparison between the searched best agent from AgentSquare and the best human-designed agent on all tasks.

Method

Webshop

ALFWorld

SciWorld

M3Tool

TravelPlanner

PDDL

AgentSquare(full)

0.617

0.651

0.432

0.285

0.520

0.219

w/o module evolution

0.595

0.623

0.288

0.236

0.483

0.202

w/o module recombination

0.578

0.546

0.310

0.258

0.267

0.173

Table A.5: Ablation study of AgentSquare on GPT-3.5 on six tasks across different domains.

Webshop

ALFWorld

SciWorld

M3Tool

TravelPlanner

PDDL

Avg cost (GPT-3.5)

$3.16

$4.25

$1.92

$2.43

$1.84

$2.70

Iterations (GPT-3.5)

23

21

8

14

9

17

Avg cost (GPT-4o)

$10.51

$13.96

$42.14

$26.03

$29.75

$26.94

Iterations (GPT-4o)

18

15

9

18

8

12

Table A.6: Average API cost per search iteration and the total number of iterations until termination for AgentSquare using GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o across six tasks.

Figure A.7: Performance versus API costs visualization on ALFWorld task.

Figure A.8: Performance versus API costs visualization on Webshop.

Figure A.9: Performance versus API costs visualization on Sciworld.

Figure A.10: Performance versus API costs visualization on M3tool.

Figure A.11: Performance versus API costs visualization on Travelplanner.

Figure A.12: Performance versus API costs visualization on PDDL.

Figure A.13: AgentSquare search trajectory on M3tool and PDDL (more hand-crafted agents, specific module combinations when surpassing best hand-crafted and the final evolved agent, other search baselines).

Figure A.14: AgentSquare search trajectory on Sciworld and Travelplanner (more hand-crafted agents, specific module combinations when surpassing best hand-crafted and the final evolved agent, other search baselines).

Figure A.15: Validation of the effectiveness of the performance predictor on dynamically searched agents for each task.

Figure A.16: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on Webshop.

Figure A.17: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on Sciworld.

Figure A.18: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on M3tool.

Figure A.19: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on Travelplanner.

Figure A.20: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on Pddl.

Figure A.21: New module discovered through AgentSquare search on Pddl.
